Government of India
Ministry of T ribal Aﬀairs     &       Ministry of Health & Family W elfare
kle
ell
DiseaseAwareness Modules on
Towards 
SICKLE CELL FREE INDIAAwareness Modules on
kle
ell
Disease
Towards 
SICKLE CELL FREE INDIAGovernment of India
Ministry of T ribal Aﬀairs     &       Ministry of Health & Family W elfareContributors 
1. Dr. Dipty Jain, Ex Prof & HOD Pediatrics, GMC Medical College, Nagpur , Maharashtra 
currently Director Mahan Trust Melghat (Chairperson)
10. Dr. Yazdi Italia, Ex Director , Go-NGO Sickle Cell Anaemia Control Program, and 
Hon’ble Secretary , Valsad Raktdan Kendra (Regional Blood Transfusion Centre & 
Haematological Research Centre) Gujarat 
12. Dr.  Abhishek Chauhan, Bharat  Arogya  and  Gyan  Mandir,  Jharkhnad6. Dr. Anupam Sachdeva,  Director , Institute of Paediatric Haematology Oncology and 
BMT, SGRH , New Delhi
9. Dr. M. A. Balasubramanyam, Adviser CP/CPHC NHSRC, Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare, New Delhi 
17. Dr. Jyoti Kotwal, Prof & HoD Department of  Hematology  SGRH, New Delhi 11. Dr. Gayatri Desai, MD (Gynaecologist ), SEW A Rural, Jhagadia, Bharuch, Gujarat2. Dr. Aparup Das, Director , Scientist 'G' & Director , ICMR-National Institute of Research 
in Tribal Health, Jabalpur , M.P.
4. Dr. Bhanu Duggal, HoD Cardiologist,  Aims Rishikesh and advisor Niti  Ayog, New Delhi  3. Dr.  Anil  Kumar ,  Additional DDG,  DGHS,  MoHFW ,  New Delhi  
5. Dr. Tulika Seth Professor , Dept  of  Haematology ,  AIIMS, New Delhi  
7. Dr. Nita Radhakrishna, Associate Professor and Head of Department, Paediatric 
Haematology Oncology , PGICH Noida, (U.P.)
8. Dr. Jyoti Rawat,  Addl Commissioner , Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, New Delhi  
13. Ms. Rekha Jain, Sakhee Health & Education Welfare Society , Faridabad, Haryana
14. Dr. Vinky Raghuwani, Pediatrician, Rughwani Child Care Center and Hospital 
Jaripatka, Nagpur , (Maharashtra)
15. Ms. Shobha Tuli, Secretary , Thalassemics India, New Delhi
16. Dr. Sunita Bijarnia, Department of Geneticist , Sir Ganaga Ram Hospital, New Delhi  
18. Dr. Amitabh Singh,  Associate Professor Pediatrics, Safdarjung, Hospital, New Delhi 
20. Dr.  Alexander , Medical Doctor & Creative Director , Global Health Foundation, UK 19. Dr. Manas Kalra,  Paediatric Hematology Oncology and BMT  , SGRH, New Delhi
21. Vinita Srivastava, Adviser Health, Ministry of Tribal Aﬀairs, New Delhi (Member 
Secretary).The Ministry takes this opportunity to thank the Chairperson and Members of the Committee 
as well as other experts for having drafted the module within a very short period of intense 
deliberations. The Ministry also acknowledges the support given by the MoHFW in the 
vetting, ﬁnalization and translation of these documents. It is sincerely hoped that these 
documents would go a long way in achieving the Mission's objective of elimination of Sickle 
Cell Anaemia by 2047 in India.  The Budget 2023 contained an announcement which reads as “A Mission to 
eliminate Sickle Cell Anaemia by 2047 will be launched. It entails awareness creation, 
universal screening of 7 crore people in the age group of 0-40 years in aﬀected tribal 
areas, and counselling through collaborative eﬀorts of central ministries and state 
governments”.   The lead Ministry in this regard is the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
(MoHFW) with the supporting Ministry being the Ministry of Tribal Aﬀairs (MoT A).  There are 
other stakeholders identiﬁed by the MoHFW in this Mission, including the State 
Governments.  
Constitution of Committee by MoT A:Introduction
 Following the post budget Webinar on the announcement held on 27.02.2023 and in 
order to formulate a comprehensive and eﬀective strategy , this Ministry has constituted a 
Committee to devise guidelines for generating awareness about the disease, its 
management and prevention of future births with the disease as well as for counseling of 
patients, care-givers and other stakeholders when an individual is diagnosed with the 
trait/disease. 
 Since among communities, there may be certain beliefs, traditional customs, myths, 
practices related to health and disease, there is need of dedicated eﬀorts to spread scientiﬁc 
awareness about how the disease is transmitted and the manner in which the transmission 
can be controlled. 
 These two modules on awareness and counseling are prepared with the aim to 
provide awareness to the general population as well to the patients, caregivers, school 
teachers and the health workers. The modules have been prepared in the form of PPT so 
that it is easier for every one to understand the sickle cell manifestation. In the modules one 
may ﬁnd duplication of the messages as these messages have to be conveyed to all the 
stakeholders. The Awareness module is primarily intended to reach the general public, 
especially the tribal population, the medical fraternity , the inﬂuencers at the local level – the 
ASHA, the Anganwadi worker , the teacher , the youth, the traditional headmen and healers, 
the Gram Panchayats and so on. The Counseling module is intended for a smaller target 
group of those who are directly aﬀected by the disease and are responsible as primary or 
secondary caregivers such as patients, their parents and other caregivers in the family , 
school teachers, co-workers and health workers.  
Towards Elimination of Sickle Cell Anaemia in India by 2047Table of Contents
 4 Awareness Modules for Teachers2. Module Part - II     25-39 4 Awareness Modules for Non-Helath Functionaries 
 4 Awareness Modules for Parents
3. Module Part - III     43-551. Module Part - I     13-22Awareness Modules for
Non-Health F unctionariesModule P art - I 13
Hi, I am Blood
I am your friend 
and live inside 
you!!
What is Blood ? 
Have you ever been injured or got a cut  in the skin? 
Have you seen red colored  ﬂuid ﬂowing from your 
skin  when cut?
This red colored liquid is called “Blood”
The blood is made up of cells that help to carry 
oxygen and ﬁght infection14
● White blood cells: ﬁght with small enemies 
like bacteria and virusCells in Blood 
Blood contains three types of cells:
● Platelets: Stop bleeding
● Red Blood Cells: Carry oxygen to diﬀerent 
parts of your body 
I have many little 
fellows inside me --
named hemoglobin -
-which carry 
oxygen to all  parts 
of the body
Red Blood Cell I Am Red Blood Cell But sometimes, my 
friend hemoglobin is 
deformed and my 
shape becomes long 
and sickle shaped. 
Then I am called a 
“Sickle Cell”. I cannot 
carry 
enough 
oxygenWhat is Sickle Cell?
Is it harmful?
Should I W orry ?
No..
Not to worry;
But you need to
know what is sickle 
cell disease. Tobe 
informed istobe 
empowered.
Sickle Cell 
disease is 
inheritedSickle Cell Disease!!!
First let me tellyou, sickle cell isof two
types
Sickle cell Disease
Or
Sickle Cell Trait/Carriers
Sickle Cell trait islargely asymptomatic 
and does notrequire any treatment
Sickle cell disease however has various 
complications.
15üRed blood cells in sickle cell 
disease have cell life of 30 to 
40 days instead of  usual 120 
days.
üRate of destruction is high 
Italia et al –Sickle Cell Anemia, 2023Changes in Red blood cell structure and function 
–Sickle cell pathophysiology 
* Sickle cells are rigid
* The stiﬀness and abnormal shape reduce their ability to move through smaller 
capillaries. They also form tangled masses of cells in larger blood vessels. 
* Blockage of blood ﬂow produces temporary or permanent organ dysfunction or 
structural changes
Italia et al – Sickle ell Anaemia, 2023
1617
Breathlessness
FatigueYellow colored eye 
Backpain
Joint painSwellingAnaemia /looking pale 
Enlargement of spleen Frequent infections/Illness 
Low ImmunityChest painFever 
Abdominal pain Symptoms of 
Sickle cell disease
Sickle cell disease can cause several health problems
COMPLICA TIONS DURING PREGNANCY : A woman 
with sickle cell disease can have a healthy baby . 
However, many risks like hypertensive syndromes 
(such as preeclampsia), blood clot in veins, preterm 
labor , fetal loss etc. may  occur . Both the mother and 
baby should be closely monitored by a healthcare 
provider . Care during pregnancy is also very important!ANAEMIA: Sickle cells have a  shorter life  than  regular  
red blood cells, the body cannot make new red  blood 
cells  fast  enough to replace old  ones. With fewer  red  
blood cells, organs  and tissues do not get enough 
oxygen they need for normal  functioning.
ORGAN DAMAGE: Lack of oxygen over many years 
can lead  to tissue and organ damage in any part of the 
body .INFECTIONS: Curved and sticky blood cells can clog 
the spleen and prevent it from doing its job – helping the 
body kill germs.PAIN: crescent–shaped cells can get stuck in smaller 
blood vessels.  This may block blood and oxygen ﬂow to 
tissues resulting in pain.What is the diﬀerence between Sickle Cell T rait and 
Sickle Cell Disease.
Diﬀerence between sickle cell disease and sickle cell trait:
SICKLE CELL  DISEASE SICKLE CELL  TRAIT
• Two copies of altered hemoglobin 
gene from parents.
• Crescent shaped structure of red 
blood cells that results in blockage 
of blood ﬂow to diﬀerent cells and 
blood vessels of the body .• Individuals carry one  copy of the 
altered hemoglobin gene.
• Combination of altered 
hemoglobin and normal 
hemoglobin result in sickle cell 
trait.
Only screening can identify sickle cell disease and carriers (trait) who may otherwise be 
healthy and have no symptomsBeing aware of your sickle cell status is very important to improve your health condition 
and prevent complications
Should I worry if I am a carrier or have sickle cell 
disease?
First of all-Don’t worry, if you have sickle cell disease or you are sickle cell trait
If you are carrier- If you have Sickle cell disease-
• You can live normal healthy life.
• You should avoid marriage with people 
having sickle cell trait or sickle cell 
disease.
• You may avoid going to high-altitude 
places.• Keep yourself safe from extreme 
environmental conditions and follow a 
healthy lifestyle• Consult the specialist / Medical oﬃcer 
as advised.
• Keep yourself hydrated
• Consume balanced and healthy diet• Take regular medicines
• Avoid high altitude places 
By taking regular medicine and regular follow-up with doctors, Sickle cell disease 
patients can avoid many problems.
18Why should I know about it?
● Because sickle cell disease / trait is preventable as it is a genetically 
transmitted disorder 
Individuals – 
may be carriers or patients.
Who should know about it?
Families and loved ones – who 
may be involved in caring for 
someone with sickle cell disease 
or those having SCT
19What should COUPLES with carrier or disease 
status be aware of ?
Couples who are carriers of the disease 
need to be aware of the possibility of 
passing sickle cell gene to their children
How to Test?
Screening
and 
Diagnosis Adrop ofblood willdetect sickle
cellbyavailable point ofcare tests ;
which isalso aconﬁrmatory testat
AB-HWC and other public health
facilities
Special blood test (HPLC,
electrophoresis )may bedone for
evaluating the utility ofred cell
indices .Itisdone athigher
healthcare facilities
2021
ALLNEWBORNS IN IDENTIFIED DISTRICTS & ST ATES SHOULD BETESTED FOR
SICKLE CELL DISEASE
Most oftheaﬀected states have sickle
cellscreening programs inplace in
hospitals where babies aretested at
birth.
Sickle cellscreening isplanned tobe
conducted among people ofagegroup
0-40years in17states identiﬁed
forSickle celldisease elimination
Living a productive life with sickle cell disease
● Sickle cell disease in a child 
puts    economic and  emotional 
stress on  the  family
● If  sickle cell disease is 
diagnosed on time, medical 
management can help you  lead  
a  productive  life22
Services available at AB-HWCs 
● Prevention Awareness 
● Screening through outreach camps and at Health and wellness centers
● Management support 
 o Treatment 
 o Referral support
● Counselling
 ○ Lifestyle modiﬁcation
 ○ Premarital and preconception counselling
● Follow-up 
● Rehabilitation (psychosocial and vocational)
Know these facts
● Sickle cell trait is not a disease. There is no chance that a sickle cell trait will 
develop into sickle cell disease.● Sickle cell anaemia is more common in tribal areas
● People of any ethnic group can have sickle cell trait or disease. In India, 17 states 
have high prevalence of sickle cell disease. It’s more common in tribal population 
but non tribals can have it too.
● Sickle cell trait can not develop into sickle cell disease● Sickle cell disease is not contagious
● A person cannot get sickle cell disease through the air, water , skin, etc
● The only way to get is to have it passed on from your parents through genes.
● Sickle cell disease is not caused by any personal / food habits
● It’s by chance that someone has Sickle cell disease- so please get newborns and 
all others tested in aﬀected areasAwareness Modules for 
ParentsModule P art - II 25
Parent Information Sheet
• Parents should share the information to the school and other places of regular 
contact about the child having sickle cell disease
• Parents should know that child must be taken for regular check ups to prevent 
complications
• The child should be taken immediately to healthcare facility / clinic/ hospital if 
having high fever , breathing problem or pain not getting relieved within 24 
hours, or sudden weakness or any other complications
What is sickle cell disease?
● These red cells also get 
destroyed early resulting in 
anaemia● This can block small blood 
vessels causing severe pain 
and organ damage including 
stroke ● In Sickle cell disease,  the 
hemoglobin molecule inside 
red blood cells is abnormal. 
● The red blood cells carrying 
sickle-hemoglobin become 
sticky and deformed (C 
shaped)26
WHA T CAUSES SICKLE CELL  DISEASE?
● Here hemoglobin is diﬀerent 
compared to the normal 
hemoglobin because of 
mutation in gene
● Carriers of the disease are 
usually not symptomatic and 
can be detected only when 
screened ● Sickle cell disease is an 
inherited condition from 
parents who have sickle cell 
trait or disease
What are the symptoms of sickle cell anaemia?
Breathlessness
FatigueYellow colored eye 
Backpain
Joint painSwellingAnaemia/looking pale 
Frequent infections 
Chest painFever 
Abdominal pain 27
WHA T IS SICKLE CELL  CRISIS?
Change of weather, diarrhea, 
fever, dehydration, infection, 
stress, exhaustion etc.
Other symptoms during the pain 
crisis● Many children and adults 
develop what is called  pain 
crisis
What triggers pain?
 Breathlessness, nausea, etc.● During this period, they 
present with acute pain in the 
back, legs, chest etc. 
How can you identify sickle cell anaemia crisis?
• Acute chest syndrome –  cough 
and diﬃculty in breathing 
• Stroke –  can aﬀect blood vessels 
in brain and cause stroke• Eye –  can aﬀect blood vessels in 
eye and reduce vision○ Crisis can present as -
• Hand-foot syndrome -  swelling 
and pain in hands and feet 
Pain crisis Painful swelling of hands and feet
Recurrent episodes of jaundice Pallor Child’ s hands look pale 28
My child has sickle cell disease. What should I do?
● But the good news is that children can be 
managed well if they are under the care of 
a doctor● Sickle cell disease is a lifelong condition
● These children can do well in life, ﬁnish 
their studies, take up a job and get married 
to a normal person and have kids also.
● So, by focusing on good medical care, we 
can provide them the ‘healthiest life 
possible’. 
How should I take care of my child with 
Sickle Cell Disease?
 3. Consultation at the earliest in an event of crisis or any complication● This includes-
 2. Pneumococcal vaccination ● Your child needs additional support and care compared to any other 
child
 4. Possibility for curative treatment may be explored 1. Routine follow-up visits with the doctor2.
29
How should I take care of my child?
HOW DO WE TREA T SICKLE CELL  ANEMIA?
Regular checkups even if there are no symptoms, as advised by your 
doctor .
• In case of anaemia, if the child is not improving with medicines, blood 
transfusion may be needed.Take medicines and vaccinations as advised by the doctor . 
• In case of sickle cell crisis, the child is admitted and treated with 
antibiotics, IV ﬂuids, etc. 
● Your child needs additional support and care 
compared to any other child
● This includes-
 1. Routine follow-up visits with the doctor
 2. Pneumococcal vaccination
 3. Consultation at the earliest in an event of   
crisis or any complication
 4. Possibility for curative treatment may be 
exploredWHEN SHOULD I T AKE MY  CHILD T O A DOCT OR?
● Your child should be seen by a doctor 
regularly at least once every 3 months or 
earlier as advised by the doctor 
● Maintain records of the treatment properly 
in a ﬁle, keep all your papers together● If you are on hydroxyurea, visit the health 
and wellness centre for monthly complete 
blood checkup and other tests as advised
TAKE YOUR CHILD T O A HOSPIT AL IF HE/SHE HAS
● Repeated fever 
● Repeated infections/pneumonia
● Recurrent episodes of jaundice 
● Repeated bouts of pain anywhere 
in the body
● Swelling of hands, feet or joint pain 
● Ulcers in legs 
● Child not growing well 
● Breathlessness 
● Enlargement of spleen
● Blood in urine
Consult the nearest medical oﬃcer or pediatrician immediately● Repeated pallor
3031
HOW CAN WE PREVENT COMPLICA TIONS IN 
SICKLE CELL  ANEMIA?
  As caregiver , parents need to make sure the following 
4.  Educate the patient for self-management 2.  Be regular with medications such as folic acid, penicillin, hydroxyurea, etc.
3.  Show child to doctor regularly as advised even when otherwise healthy• Maintain a digital health record - when possible• Keep medical records: Hard copy or digital record by ABHA  ID
• Give copies of reports and prescriptions to the doctor during a visit
5.  Be patient and considerate• Keep copies of reports, discharge records, diary of events and pain crisis 
scores
MAINT AIN A MEDICAL  RECORD FOR YOUR CHILD 
CONT AINING THE FOLLOWING 
● Immunizations received ● Name
● Type of sickle cell disease
● Transfusion dates ● Ongoing medical problems ● DOB
● Past medical and surgical history
● Medications 1.   Be regular with treatment 2. NONMEDICAL  CARE T O THE CHILD
• Prevent dehydration: 6-8 glasses of 
water is advised per day. Take breaks 
during exercise in school routine to 
prevent dehydration. Keep child 
hydrated during summer/fever , etc.
• Know symptoms and seek timely care 
for symptoms As a parent, make sure of the following:
• Encourage child to take a balanced 
diet
3. THINGS T O DO T O REDUCE INFECTIONS
It is important to prevent infections in children with sickle cell disease. Because 
children with sickle cell disease are prone to infections. The risk of sickle cell 
crisis increases during infections. As a parent, make sure of the following: 
● Maintain good hygiene to prevent infections. Simple measures to reduce the 
chance of infections are - 
c. Food hygiene - avoid food prepared unhygienicallya. Washing hands regularly
d. Balanced diet 
e. Vaccinations as per the national immunization schedule b. Brush teeth twice a day
f. Penicillin prophylaxis to prevent some common infections under the 
supervision of the doctor
3233
4. MAINT AIN ACTIVE AND HEAL THY LIFESTYLE
○ Give breaks in between exercises to hydrate themselves
○ Breathing exercises, yoga and meditation are helpful○ Avoid strenuous exercise in hot climate
○ Encourage children to use the toilet since they will be drinking more water● Advise children to exercise regularly
○ Improves stamina ○ It strengthens heart and lungs
○ Reduces pain crisis 
● Discuss with your doctor regarding the level of physical activity to be followed by 
your child
● Children should be encouraged to continue schooling and follow active lifestyle
● Children should be encouraged to participate in sports
Services available at AB-HWCs under the Sickle Cell 
Disease Elimination Mission 
● Screening through outreach camps and at Health and wellness centers
● Management support 
○ Treatment 
○ Referral support
● Counselling
○ Lifestyle modiﬁcation
● Follow-up 
● Rehabilitation (psychosocial and vocational)● Prevention Awareness 
○ Premarital and preconception counsellingWHA T IS THE V ACCINA TION SCHEDULE T O BE FOLLOWED? 
WHA T IS THE V ACCINA TION SCHEDULE T O BE FOLLOWED? NATIONAL  IMMUNIZA TION SCHEDULE 
Additional vaccines to be administered as per National Programme.
3435
WHEN SHOULD WE T AKE THE CHILD T O A DOCT OR IN AN 
EMERGENCY?
In case of fever/pain 8. Sudden weakness of arms/ legs 5. Sudden increase in pallor or yellowness of eyes3. Diﬃculty in breathing or chest pain 
10. Sudden increase in size of spleen 7. Severe headache 
11. Unconsciousness or giddiness or confusion2. Vomiting or loose stools 1. Fever more than 101 °F 
4. Pain in abdomen 
6. Distention of abdomen 
9. Seizures If the child has any of the following, take him/her to the hospital 
immediately
● Child needs to be taken to the doctor even if  when fever or pain reduces● Keep child well hydrated.● Fever and pain are EMERGENCIES for a child with sickle cell anemiaHOW DO WE LOOK FOR INCREASE IN SPLEEN SIZE?
ARE THERE CURA TIVE OPTIONS FOR SICKLE CELL  ANEMIA? ● Any sudden increase in size of 
abdomen or pain in  abdomen, 
dizziness, pallor , etc., should be 
considered as an emergency 
● Only few patients with very 
severe sickle cell anemia 
need a curative option● Usually, patients are 
maintained well on regular 
medicines. They can 
maintain a good life with 
medicines and good follow 
up
3637
CAN WE PREVENT SICKLE CELL  DISEASE?
CAN WE PREVENT BIRTH OF CHILD WITH SICKLE CELL  
DISEASE?
YES
● Get yourselves tested today for sickle cell trait
● If not tested before marriage, all pregnant women 
should be tested in the ﬁrst 3 months for both sickle 
cell anemia and thalassemia which is another 
hemoglobin disorder that is common in India, using 
the same tests.● Ideally sickle cell status should be known prior to 
marriage
● If a pregnant lady is found to be positive for the 
sickle cell trait, her spouse should be tested 
immediately so that the fetus can be tested early in 
pregnancy .  ● Hence screening of couple before 
planning a child is very crucial.
● Screening for sickle cell anemia is 
possible by simple blood tests (point 
of care tests, CBC, HPLC, 
Electrophoresis, etc.).● If both parents are carriers for sickle 
cell anemia, there is a 25% chance of 
a child being aﬀected.
WHA T SHOULD BE THE WORR Y ABOUT SICKLE CELL  TRAIT?
WHA T ARE THE GOVERNMENT BENEFITS FOR MY  CHILD?
 ○ Free investigations and treatment Government of India oﬀers support for: 
 ○ Free train/bus travel
 ○ Disability beneﬁts -Beneﬁts in exams,   
reservation in education ○ Free blood transfusions● Usually asymptomatic
● Prevent dehydration during exercise and hot weather . 
● Contact doctor for urgent advice:
 1. If traveling to high altitude
 2. If having eye trauma  
 3. If noticing blood in urine  
3839
ROAD MAP  
Get newborn 
screening done
Start medicines 
advised by doctor
Get vaccinations as 
advised.
Ensure normal 
breast feeding and 
weaning
Care during 
childhood illnessesNewborn baby
Childhood 
Ensure healthy diet
Prevent dehydrationGet vaccinations 
and medicines as 
advised 
Normal schooling 
and activitiesCare during 
childhood illnesses; 
recognize 
emergencies.Adults 
Encourage active 
lifestyle
Healthy diet; vitamin 
D and calcium
Check sickle status 
of spouse before 
planning for a familyMedicines as 
advised
Get regular checkup 
for organ damage Watch for lifestyle 
diseasesEncourage active 
lifestyle
Medicines as 
advised 
Encourage young 
children with sickle to 
do well in life Senior citizens 
Awareness Module for 
TeachersModule P art - III 4. Urgent visit to healthcare facility/clinic/ hospital if high fever ,  breathing problem 
or pain not getting better within 24 hours,  or sudden weakness or other 
concerns.1. Teachers should be aware of children having sickle cell disease.
3. Teachers should know that child must be taken for regular checkups to prevent 
problems.
5. When in doubt –Best option is to consult the doctor- these children are at risk of 
sudden problems.TEACHER INFORMA TION SHEET
2.  Teachers should know that these children need regular medicines and extra 
regular ﬂuids. Since they have to drink extra water regularly , they will need to use 
toilet more frequently .
● The prevalence of sickle cell carrier state is high in the tribal belt of India.
● Hence children born in these states/districts in all schools in these areas 
should be screened for disease and carrier status WHY  ARE WE DISCUSSING ABOUT SICKLE CELL  
DISEASE?
43WHA T IS SICKLE CELL  DISEASE?
● The red blood cells carrying 
sickle-hemoglobin become 
sticky and deformed (C shaped)
● This can block small blood 
vessels causing severe pain, 
and organ damage including 
stroke. 
● These red cells also get 
destroyed early resulting in 
anaemia● Sickle cell anemia is a genetic 
condition where the hemoglobin 
molecule inside red blood cells is 
abnormal. 
WHA T CAUSES SICKLE CELL  DISEASE?
● Here hemoglobin is diﬀerent 
compared to the normal 
hemoglobin because of mutation 
in gene● Sickle cell disease is an 
inherited condition from parents 
who have sickle cell trait/ SCD
● Carriers of the disease are 
usually not symptomatic and can 
be detected only when screened 
4445WHA T ARE THE SYMPT OMS OF SICKLE CELL  ANAEMIA?
● They present with occlusion of small 
blood vessels in hands, feet, chest etc● Sickle cell anemia patients (HbSS) are 
symptomatic from early life.
● The early signs are swelling of hands 
and feet, anemia (paleness of body), 
repeated fever, fatigue, repeated 
infections, poor growth, repeated 
episodes of jaundice etc. 
WHA T IS A SICKLE CELL  CRISIS?
  Breathlessness, nausea, etc. Change of weather, diarrhea, 
fever, dehydration, infection, 
stress, exhaustion.● Many children and adults 
develop what is called a pain 
crisis
● During this period, they present 
with pain in the back, legs, chest 
etc. 
What triggers pain?
 Other symptoms during the pain 
crisis.
HOW CAN YOU IDENTIFY  SICKLE CELL  ANAEMIA  CRISIS
 IN CHILDREN?
○ Crisis can present as :
1. Hand-foot syndrome- swelling and pain of hands and feet 
2. Acute chest syndrome – cough, diﬃculty in breathing 
3. Eye – can aﬀect blood vessels in eye and reduce vision
4. Stroke – can aﬀect blood vessels to brain and cause stroke
Pain Crisis 
Painful swelling of hands and feetRecurrent episodes of jaundice 
Pallor Child’ s hands look pale compared to yours
4647HOW DO WE TREA T SICKLE CELL  ANEMIA?
 Regular checkups even if there are no symptoms, as advised by the doctor .
Taking  medicines and vaccination as advised by doctor . We treat children with 
sickle cell anaemia with:
• In case of anaemia, if the child is not improving with medicines,  blood 
transfusion may be needed.
• In case of a sickle cell crisis, the child is admitted and treated with antibiotics, 
IV ﬂuids, etc. 
HOW T O TAKE CARE OF A CHILD WITH SICKLE CELL  DISEASE?
2. Encourage drinking plenty of water .1. Guide parents and children to maintain a healthy lifestyle.
3. Maintain hygiene to reduce the chance of infections.
b. Avoid triggers like exhaustion, extreme cold, dehydration, high altitude 
and long-distance travel including long ﬂights.4. Educate them to
a. Be regular with their medicines.TAKE THE CHILD T O A HOSPIT AL IF HE/SHE HAS
● Repeated fever 
● Recurrent episodes of jaundice 
Consult the nearest medical oﬃcer or 
pediatrician.● Repeated infections/pneumonia
● Child is not growing well ● Swelling of hands, feet or joint pain ● Repeated bouts of pain anywhere in 
the body
● Ulcers in legs ● Repeated anaemia 
● Blood in urine
HOW T O SUPPORT P ARENTS AND CHILDREN T O PREVENT 
COMPLICA TIONS IN SICKLE CELL  ANEMIA?
● Be regular with showing child to doctor as advised even when otherwise 
healthy1. GUIDE THEM TO:
● Be regular with treatment medications 
● Maintain a digital health record by ABHA  ID
● Keep medical records (reports, discharges, etc.) carefully . Keep a diary of 
events. Score pain crisis and mention it in diary
4849MAINT AIN A MEDICAL  RECORD FOR THE CHILD 
● Past medical and surgical history● Ongoing medical problems 
● Transfusion dates ● DOB
● Type of sickle cell disease
● Medications 
● Immunizations received ● Name
2. NON-MEDICAL  CARE T O THE CHILD
As a teacher , make sure of the following:
a. Encourage child to take a balanced diet.
b. Prevent dehydration: 6-8 glasses of 
water intake is advised per day. Take 
breaks during exercise in school routine 
to prevent dehydration. Keep child 
hydrated during summer/fever , etc.
c. For children, you should ask your doctor 
how much water to be taken, usually 1.5 
times more than normal for the age child, 
is advised. 
d. Know symptoms and seek timely care 
for symptoms
3. THINGS T O DO T O REDUCE INFECTIONS
f. Penicillin to prevent some common infections under the supervision of 
the doctora. Washing hands regularly
g. Pneumococcal vaccination as per medical advicee. Vaccinations as per the national immunization scheduled. Balanced diet b. Brush teeth twice a day
c. Food hygiene – avoid food prepared unhygienicallyMaintain good hygiene to prevent infections. Simple measures to reduce the 
chance of infections areChildren with sickle cell disease are prone to infections. The risk of sickle cell 
crisis increases during infections. hence it is best to prevent infections.  As a 
teacher , make sure of the following: 
4. MAINT AIN ACTIVE AND HEAL THY LIFESTYLE
○ It strengthens the heart and lungs
○ Improves stamina 
○ Reduces pain crisis As a teacher , make sure of the following
● Advise children to exercise regularly .
 ● Children should be encouraged to participate in sports.
○ Breathing exercises, yoga and meditation is helpful.○ Avoid strenuous exercise in hot climate.
○ Give breaks in between exercises to hydrate themselves. 
○ Encourage children to use the toilet since they will be hydrating more. 
5051WHA T IS THE V ACCINA TION SCHEDULE T O BE FOLLOWED? 
NATIONAL  IMMUNIZA TION SCHEDULE 
WHA T IS THE V ACCINA TION SCHEDULE T O BE FOLLOWED? 
Additional vaccines to be administered as per National Programme.WHEN SHOULD WE T AKE THE CHILD T O A DOCT OR AS AN 
EMERGENCY?
8. Sudden weakness of arms/ legs 
11. Unconsciousness or giddiness or confusion4. Pain in abdomen 2. Vomiting or loose stools 
3. Diﬃculty in breathing or chest pain 
5. Sudden increase in pallor or yellowness of eyes1. Fever more than 1010F 
6. Distention of abdomen ● Take the child to the hospital immediately , If the child in your care has any 
of the following :
7. Severe headache 
10. Seizures 
IN CASE OF FEVER/P AIN 
● Child needs to be taken to the doctor even when fever or pain reduces● Fever and pain are EMERGENCIES for a child with sickle cell anemia
● Keep child well hydrated
5253ARE THERE CURA TIVE OPTIONS FOR SICKLE CELL  ANAEMIA?
● Usually , patients are maintained well on regular medicines. They maintain a 
good lifestyle while on medicines and with good follow up.
● Only few patients with very severe sickle cell anaemia need a curative option.
WHA T SHOULD BE THE WORR Y ABOUT SICKLE CELL  TRAIT?
3. noticing blood in urine● Usually asymptomatic
● Contact the doctor if
1. traveling to high altitude● Prevent dehydration during exercise and hot weather
2. having eye trauma 
WHA T ARE THE GOVERNMENT BENEFITS FOR P ATIENTS 
WITH SICKLE CELL  ANEMIA?
Government of India oﬀers support for 
● Disability beneﬁts -Beneﬁts in exams, reservation in education.● Free investigations and treatment
● Free blood transfusions
● Free train travel
ROAD MAP  
Newborn baby
Ensure normal 
breast feeding and 
weaning
Care during 
childhood illnessesGet newborn 
screening done
Start medicines 
advised by doctor
Get vaccinations as 
advised.
Prevent dehydrationCare during 
childhood illnesses; 
recognize 
emergencies.Get vaccinations 
and medicines as 
advised 
Ensure healthy dietChildhood 
Normal schooling 
and activitiesEncourage active 
lifestyle
Healthy diet; vitamin 
D and calcium
Medicines as 
advisedAdults 
Get regular checkup 
for organ damage
Check sickle status 
of spouse before 
planning for a familyEncourage active 
lifestyle
Watch for lifestyle 
diseases
Encourage young 
children with sickle to 
do well in life Senior citizens 
Medicines as 
advised 
5455
Government of India
Ministry of T ribal Aﬀairs     &       Ministry of Health & Family W elfare
