Government of India
Disease
Towards 
SICKLE CELL FREE INDIACounseling Modules on

Government of India
Disease
Towards 
SICKLE CELL FREE INDIACounseling Modules on

Overview of Counseling for
Sickle Cell Disease Module P art - I 

What is Sickle Cell Anemia?
● Sickle cell anaemia is a genetic condition where the haemoglobin molecule inside red 
blood cells is abnormal. 
● Both men and women have equal risk of getting this disease.
● Spectrum of Sickle Cell : Carrier AS
(C shaped) and get destroyed resulting in anaemia
13● Sickle cell anaemia occurs in children whose parents are sickle cell carriers
● Awareness can improve screening and in reducing the burden of this disease  ● This is a chronic disease with need for life long visits 
● Since the prevalence of sickle cell carrier state is high in India, it is important to be aware 
of this condition 
1.   All pregnant women during the ﬁrst 3 months of pregnancy 
2. All school and college going children in high prevalence areas 
3. Community screening in high prevalence areas (all persons between 0-40 years 
including newborns)● Screening is therefore advisable for ● Being aware of your sickle cell state is very important before planning a child 


14Population Screening
Target groups
Young adults 
High risk screening
Awareness camps
premarital Pretest 
counseling
Screening test 
(POC, HPLC) Post test counseling
Screen positive 
Counseling
Post marital partner 
testing Prenatal diagnosis 
if both partners are 
carriers  and mutation 
identiﬁed
Target groups
All antenatal 
mothersPretest 
counseling
Screening test
(POC, HPLC) Post test 
counseling
Screen positive 
Counseling
Test husbandPrenatal diagnosis 
if both partners are 
carriers  and 
mutation identiﬁedPrenatal ScreeningWhat is Sickle Cell Anemia?

Community scr eening for 
Sickle Cell  statusModule P art II 

After screening counselling for positive patients
AS, SS
● Children suﬀering from sickle cell trait / carrier have one gene of the sickle cell from one 
of their parent. These children won’t have complications and symptoms in general. But 
they act as a carrier . 
● Sickle cell disease can have complications which varies from person to person, and life-
long treatment is required.
● In every pregnancy there is a 25% risk of having an aﬀected child, if both partners are 
carriers.● The treatment of sickle cell disease is available at primary health centres or community 
health centres 
● It is a genetic change in the blood forming genes
● This is passed from parents to their children
● The aﬀected children can be either male or female

Screening for 
Sickle Cell Carrier statusModule P art - III 

Why do we screen for sickle cell carrier status in antenatal period?
● With correct knowledge you can prevent having  children with sickle cell disease in your 
family .
Pretest counseling ● The carrier rate of sickle cell disease is high in India. Carriers are not symptomatic. So 
unless you check your carrier status by HPLC or electrophoresis, you may be 
completely unaware of this. Hence, always check your carrier status, before you plan on 
starting a family.
● Prenatal testing is available to help you and your partner know whether your baby will 
have sickle cell disease or not.Pre-test counseling 
● The prenatal test is advised if both of the parent are sickle cell carriers or one of the 
parent has sickle cell anaemia (HbSS) and the other is a carrier .
● You can prevent the birth of a child with a severe haemoglobin problem like sickle cell 
disease if you decide that is what you want. 
● Prenatal testing is done at 3-4 months of pregnancy at selected centres.
● It is done by few simple blood testsHow is the test for detecting sickle cell carrier state done? 
 4 Complete blood counts
 4 HPLC 
● The results are usually ready within 2-3 days ● Both are done by drawing 2-3 ml of bloodAntenatal screening for detecting sickle cell carrier state 
● If you have been detected as a carrier (HbAS), then check the carrier status of your 
spouse and meet a doctor for further counseling.
ek  jaaMca, svasqa pairvaar ko  naama

● If you are planning a child, then test your spouse immediately
What happens if you both are tested to be sickle carriers?Pre test counseling – Sickle cell carrier state
• In every pregnancy there is a 25% risk of having an aﬀected child if both partners are 
carriers.
● There is a 25% chance of having a baby with sickle cell disease ● If you are tested to be a sickle cell carrier , there is no need to panic• Both men and women have equal risk of getting this disease.
• It is a genetic change in the blood forming genes
• The aﬀected children can be either male or female
What happens if you are tested to be a sickle carrier?• This is passed from parents to their children
● Sickle carriers live a normal life
● If you are not, it is still preferable to check the status of your spouse so that you are 
prepared for this later
● If both you and your spouse have been tested to be a sickle or thalassemia carrier , then 
immediately visit a center which has the provision for prenatal testing
● Timely prenatal diagnosis with CVS or Amniocentesis will help in diagnosing the disease 
in the baby 
● Do prenatal testing by 12-15th week of pregnancy 
Post-test antenatal 
counselling where 
mothers and spouses are 
positive for Sickle carrier 
state (AS)
  If both pregnant women and her spouse 
have been tested to be a sickle carrier , 
then immediately visit a center which 
has the provision for prenatal testing.
  There is a 25% chance of having a baby 
with sickle cell disease. 
  Timely prenatal diagnosis with CVS or 
Amniocentesis will help in diagnosing 
the disease in the baby . 
  Do prenatal testing by 12-15th week of 
pregnancy . 
  What Are The Risks With This Result?  
both sickle carriers) If two sickle cell 
carriers get married- then they 25% 
chance of having a child with sickle cell 
disease

 2. Amniocentesis 
● A needle is inserted into the uterus and sample is taken from the respective areas                                                              
● Usually no● The tests done that can be done for this purpose are
 1. Chorionic Villus Sampling 
Will this test be harmful for my baby?What is the test done to detect the Sickle cell status of the baby?
● If both you and your spouse are sickle cell carriers and if you are pregnant at present, the 
status of the baby should be known before 20 weeks of pregnancy
 3. Percutaneous Cord blood sampling 
● The tests are done between 10-18 weeks of pregnancy
● Results are available within 3-4 weeks 
● There is a very small risk for the baby which 
will be explained to you
● If you are feeling worried, speak to us● This is a test to reduce the chance of having a 
baby with a life long illnessDon’t be afraid
● It is natural to feel anxious 
What Are The Risks W ith This Result?  ( both sickle carriers)
If two sickle cell carriers get married- then they 25% chance of having a 
child with sickle cell disease.
N= normal gene
C= change or mutated gene

What can be the results of test
Normal Haemoglobin
HB AASickle Cell tr ait Sickle Cell Disease 
Pre test counseling – Sickle cell carrier state
● If you and your spouse 
are sickle cell carriers, 
it is preferable to do 
prenatal testing to 
know the baby’ s sickle 
status in the ﬁrst 3 
months’  of pregnancy
● If the baby has sickle 
cell trait, pregnancy 
can be continued as 
usual 

Post test counseling – Sickle cell carrier state
● Your baby has been 
detected to have a sickle 
cell carrier state
● Here only one gene is 
aﬀected and the other is 
normal
● You can proceed with 
pregnancy as normal
● After birth, consult your 
paediatrician for advice 
regarding long term care 
and precautions 
What is sickle cell disease?
● These red cells also get destroyed 
early resulting in anaemia● This can block small blood vessels 
causing severe pain, and organ 
damage including stroke. ● Sickle cell anaemia is a genetic 
condition where the haemoglobin 
molecule inside red blood cells is 
abnormal. 
● The red blood cells carrying 
sickle-haemoglobin become 
sticky and deformed (C shaped)

  However, if you decide to proceed with this 
pregnancy ,  consult your paediatrician as soon as the 
child is born for advice regarding long term care and 
precautions Post test 
antenatal 
counselling 
when fetus is 
diagnosed as 
Post test counseling – Sickle cell disease
● There is an option to do 
medical termination of 
pregnancy before 20 weeks of 
pregnancy ● Your fetus has been detected 
to have  sickle cell disease 
● As we discussed earlier , this is 
a chronic lifelong disease 
which needs specialised care 

Pre test counseling – Sickle cell carrier state
● If you and your spouse are 
sickle cell carriers, it is 
preferable to do prenatal 
testing to know the baby’ s 
sickle status in the ﬁrst 3 
months’  of pregnancy
● If the baby has sickle cell 
disease, then medical 
termination of pregnancy is 
allowed, to prevent the birth 
of the child with a lifelong 
illness 
What does it mean if the baby has Sickle cell disease?
● The child should be on lifelong medications with Hydroxyurea and penicillin 
and special vaccinations to prevent infections ● This baby will need regular checks to prevent Sickle cell crisis and 
complications 
● The child may also need blood transfusions and at times exchange 
transfusions during periods of crisis 
● This baby can also have life threatening complications like stroke, severe 
anemia, risk for clotting etc. ● If you decide to continue with pregnancy , 

Antenatal visits for lady with
Sickle Cell T raitModule P art - IV 

Antenatal care for sickle cell carrier women
● You are a sickle cell carrier
● Your spouse is not a sickle or thalassemia carrier and you have decided to 
proceed with this pregnancy 
● For a sickle carrier , pregnancy and delivery will be similar to any other person 
without sickle carrier status
● However , you should avoid – extremes of weather , dehydration, strenuous 
exercise etc.                            

Antenatal car e for lady with
Sickle Cell DiseaseModule P art - V

Antenatal care for lady with sickle cell disease
3. Viral markers – HIV, Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C 
● Avoid dehydration – take more water than usual
● There is a risk of clot in veins during pregnancy if you have sickle cell disease. Keep 
walking and exercising● Your spouse has been tested and is not a carrier state
6. For pain crisis you can take paracetamol. Other drugs should be taken only after 
consulting your doctor ● You have been on treatment with hydroxy urea and penicillin prior to being pregnant
2. Complete blood count ● You have been counseled regarding the risk of transmitting this gene to your oﬀspring
5. Aspirin and Folic acid are required during pregnancy4. Stop Hydroxyurea before becoming pregnant. It may be restarted after the ﬁrst 
trimester 
● Most women with sickle cell disease do not have any major issues during pregnancy ● Points to remember 
● Crisis can be triggered during pregnancy  ● You have sickle cell disease (HbSS)
● In addition to regular checkup with your gynecologist, you should inform this to your 
hematologist as well
1. Complete your vaccination status – hepatitis B, pneumococcal vaccine 
● Regular BP, Urine protein measurements are crucial during pregnancy 
● Normal delivery is possible. Some patients with sickle cell disease may been caesarean 
section 
● Ask your ASHA  to help you during this period 
● Pregnant women have a higher risk of developing blood 
clots in the legs (venous thrombosis) compared with 
women who are not pregnant. 
● Sickle cell disease may also aﬀect your baby’ s 
growth because it can aﬀect how your placenta works. ● There is also a higher chance that you may get 
pre-eclampsia (a condition of high blood pressure 
and protein in the urine) in later pregnancy . 
The blood pressure and urine should be checked 
regularly .

● Care during crisis
● Sickle cell crisis should be prevented as much as possible● Follow all regular ultrasound tests and blood tests during pregnancy● Check with your doctors about what is best for you and your baby . 
● Folic acid tablets are to be taken regularly● Eat well during pregnancy
● Iron tablet may not be required for sickle cell disease patients who are pregnancy
● Early labour may happen;  you will need to check with your obstetrician about this. You 
may need to have a caesarean section. 
● However , if you develop a crisis, you may need admission
● In case of high fever , severe pain, diﬃculty in breathing, giddiness, diﬃculty in 
moving arm/leg, diﬃculty in vision reach emergency 
● You will be started on drips, oxygen, medicines for pain, antibiotics, blood thinners 
etc as needed

● Blood transfusion may be required during delivery ● Normal delivery should be possible in most cases. 
If there are any other issues for the mother or baby , 
your doctor may recommend caesarean section
● During delivery – you need to keep yourself hydratedCare during delivery for lady with sickle cell 
disease
● You may need drip, oxygen and pain medicines ● Insist on a hospital delivery . Avoid home delivery as far as 
possible
● Your baby will be attended to by a doctor during delivery
Care after delivery for lady with sickle cell disease
● Be well hydrated
● Start moving as early as possible. This helps reduce 
the risk of clot formation in the legs 
● Start breast feeding your baby
● Continue calcium, folic acid as advised by 
your doctor 
● Contraception can be followed as advised 
by your doctor
● Contraception after sickle cell disease delivery
● Levonorgestral IUD is contraceptive of choice.
● Other options are progesterone only pill and 
Depomedroxy progesterone acetate.
● Combination birth control and Copper containing 
IUD are less preferable.

Care of a newborn with
Sickle Cell T raitModule P art - VI 

● Sickle cell disease is an inherited condition 
● The gene for the globin chain is diﬀerent (similar to how people have blue-
coloured eyes or brown hair)
● It is inherited from parents who have sickle cell trait 
● Carriers are usually not symptomatic and can be detected only when 
screened What causes sickle cell disease?
What are the symptoms of sickle cell anemia?
● Sickle cell anemia patients (HbSS) disease are 
symptomatic from early life 
● The early signs are swelling of hands and feet, 
anemia (paleness of body), repeated fever, 
fatigue, repeated infections, poor growth, 
repeated episodes of jaundice etc. ● They present with occlusion of small blood vessels 
in hands, feet, chest etc

Crisis 
Painful sw elling of hands and feet
Recurrent episodes of jaundice 
Pallor
Child’s hands look pale compared to yours

What is a crisis?
● During this period, they present to the 
hospital with pain in the back, legs, chest 
● What triggers pain?
 Change of weather, diarrhea, fever, 
dehydration, infection, stress, exhaustion● Many children and adults develop what is 
called a pain crisis. 
How can you identify sickle cell anemia crisis?
1. Hand-foot syndrome- swelling and 
pain of hands and feet 
2. Acute chest syndrome – cough, 
diﬃculty in breathing 
3. Eye – can aﬀect blood vessels in 
eye and reduce vision● Crisis can present as 
4. Stroke – can aﬀect blood vessels 
to brain and cause stroke

My child has sickle cell disease. What should I do?
● These children can do well in life, ﬁnish their 
studies, take up a job and get married and have 
kids as well. ● Sickle cell disease is a chronic condition
● But the good news is that children can be 
managed well if they are under the care of a 
doctor
● So, by focusing on good medical care, we can 
provide them the “healthiest life possible”
How should I take care of 
my child?
● Your child needs additional support and care 
compared to any other child
1. Vaccination 
3. Routine follow-up visits with the doctor ● This includes
2. Medication 
4. Possibility for curative treatment 

What are the vaccinations that need to be given in 
sickle cell anemia patients?
● All vaccines provided by GOI – vaccination program 
● H. Inﬂuenza B vaccine ● Meningococcal vaccineIn addition 
● Pneumococcal vaccine – Conjugate + Polysaccharide
● COVID vaccine is advised as per age 
● Yearly Inﬂuenza vaccine advised ● Hepatitis B vaccine , Typhoid vaccine is recommended 
What are the vaccination schedule to be followed? 
National Immunization schedule 

Take your child to a hospital if he/she has
● Repeated infections/pneumonia
● Recurrent episodes of jaundice 
● Consult the nearest medical oﬃcer or 
paediatrician● Repeated bouts of pain anywhere 
in the body
● Ulcers in legs 
● Is not growing well ● Swelling of hands, feet or joint pain ● Repeated anaemia – needs blood 
transfusions● Repeated fever 
Counselling for SS patients

Nutrition in Sickle cell anemia 

Government of India


