Diclofenac
What are the uses of diclofenac?
Diclofenac is used for pain relief. It relieves pain in conditions like headache, mild migraine, muscle pain, dental pain, rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, osteoarthritis, or painful menses.
How does Diclofenac work?
Diclofenac is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). It works by blocking the release of certain chemical messengers that cause pain and inflammation (redness and swelling).
What are the common side effects of Diclofenac?
Nausea, Headache, Dizziness, Vomiting, Flatulence, Constipation, Diarrhea, Abdominal pain, Dyspepsia, Gastrointestinal bleeding, Gastrointestinal ulcer, Rash, Application site irritation, Injection site pain

Why is diclofenac diethylamine used?
DICLOFENAC DIETHYLAMINE is used to relieve pain and inflammation associated with musculoskeletal disorders, strain, sprain, arthritis, contusions (bruises), post-traumatic pain, and low back pain. Musculoskeletal pain could occur due to arthritis, osteoporosis, fractures, dislocations, problems with the bone structure or injury to the bones, joints, tendons, muscles, and ligaments.
 
What does diclofenac diethylamine contain?
 Diclofenac diethylamine, which works by blocking the effect of a chemical messenger known as cyclo-oxygenase (COX) enzymes that make another chemical prostaglandin. By blocking the effect of COX enzymes, fewer prostaglandins are produced; this helps in reducing mild to moderate pain and inflammation at the injured or damaged site. 
 
What are the side effects of diclofenac diethylamine?
 In some cases, you may experience common side effects such as application site reactions like itching, irritation, redness, and burning sensation. Most of these side effects do not require medical attention and will resolve gradually over time. However, you are advised to talk to your doctor if the side effects persist or worsen.

What are the Directions for Use of diclofenac diethylamine?
Cream/Ointment/Gel: Take a pea-sized amount and apply it directly onto the affected area. Spray: Point the nozzle towards the area of the application and spray the medication from at least 6-8 inches away from the application site for even distribution of the drug. Gently spread the medication if required; do not rub. Transdermal patch: Clean and dry the affected area. Apply the patch to the non-hairy area. Do not cut the patch.

How to store diclofenac diethylamine?
Store in a cool and dry place away from sunlight.

