Introduction of Rotavirus Vaccine
in the Universal Immunization Programme

Given Orally 2.5 ml dose

#List of Abbreviations
AD:Auto Disable

AEFI:Adverse Events Following immunization

AVD:Alternate Vaccine Delivery System

ANM:Auxiliary Nurse Midwife

ASHA:Accredited Social Health Activist

AWW:Anganwadi Worker

BMGF:Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation

CARE:Co-operative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere

CBO:Community Based Organization

CHC:Community Health Centre

CMHO:Chief Medical and Health Officer

CMO:Chief Medical Officer

CRF:Case Reporting Form

DALY:Disability Adjusted Life Year

DF:Deep Freezer

DHS:District Health Society

DIO:District Immunization Officer

DM:District Magistrate

DTFI:District Task Force on Immunization

ELISA:Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay

eVIN:Electronic Vaccine Intelligence Network

FAQs:Frequently Asked Questions

FCIF:Final Case Investigation Form

GoI:Government of India

GHS:Global Health Strategies

GMSD:Government Medical Stores Depot

GVAP:Global Vaccine Action Plan

HIV:Human Immunodeficiency Virus

HMIS:Health Management Information System

HRAs:High Risk Areas

HWs:Health Workers

IAP:Indian Academy of Pediatrics

IAPSM:Indian Association of Preventive and Social Medicine

ICDS:Integrated Child Development Services

ICMR:Indian Council of Medical Research

IEC:Information Education Communication

IPC:Interpersonal Communication

ILR:Ice Lined Refrigerator

IMA:Indian Medical Association

IMR:Infant Mortality Rate

INCLEN:International Clinical Epidemiological Network

INR:Indian Rupee

IRSSN:Indian Rotavirus Strain Surveillance Network

ITSU:Immunization Technical Support Unit

JSI:John Snow Inc.

LHV:Lady Health Visitor

MCP:Mother and Child Protection Card

MCTS:Mother and Child Tracking System

MDG:Millennium Development Goals

M&E:Monitoring and Evaluation

MLA:Member of Legislative Assembly

MO:Medical Officer

MP:Member of Parliament

MoHFW:Ministry of Health and Family Welfare

NCCVMRC:National Cold chain and Vaccine Management Resource Centre

NGO:Non governmental Organization

NHM:National Health Mission

NIHFW:National Institute of Health and Family Welfare

NPSP:National Public Health Surveillance Project

NTAGI:National Technical Advisory Group on Immunization

ORS:Oral Rehydration Solution

PATH:Program for Appropriate Technology in Health

PCIF:Preliminary Case Investigation Form

PHC:Primary Health Centre

PIR:Programme Implementation Review

RMNCH+A:Reproductive Maternal Newborn Child and Adolescent Health

RNA:Ribonucleic Acid

RT-PCR:Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction

RVGE:Rotavirus Gastroenteritis

RVV:Rotavirus Vaccine

SCID:Severe Combined Immunodeficiency Disease

SHS:State Health Society

SEPIO:State Expanded Programme on Immunization Officer

SIO:State Immunization Officer

SMNet:Social Mobilization Network

SMO:Surveillance Medical Officer

STFI:State Task Force on Immunization

ToT:Training of Trainers

UIP:Universal Immunization Programme

UNDP:United Nations Development Programme

UNICEF:United Nations Children’s Fund

U5MR:Under five Mortality rate

URI:Upper Respiratory Infections

VVM:Vaccine Vial Monitor

WASH:Water Sanitation and Hygiene Interventions

WHO:World Health Organization

WIC:Walk-In Cooler


#Chapter 2

EPIDEMIOLOGY OF
ROTAVIRUS DIARRHEA

What is rotavirus and what diseases does Rotavirus cause?
Rotavirus is a leading cause of severe and fatal diarrhea in children under five years of age
worldwide. 

In India, 40 percent of the children hospitalized for diarrhea are infected with Rotavirus.

An estimated 78,000 diarrheal deaths occuring annually in children in India are due to Rotavirus;
majority of these deaths occur in children under two years of age.


How does Rotavirus spread?
Rotavirus is highly contagious and resilient. Nearly every child is at risk of infection, regardless of
location, hygiene practices, or access to safe drinking water or sanitation. 
Since infection occurs early
in life, the majority of older children and adults develop some immunity against Rotavirus disease.


How to diagnose rotavirus infection?
Clinically, it is not possible to differentiate Rotavirus infection from other infectious diarrhoea and laboratory
tests of stool are needed to confirm diagnosis of Rotavirus infection. Various tests are available for detecting
Rotavirus in stool include ELISA, latex agglutination assays, strip-based tests, and reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). 

How to treat Rotavirus diarrhea?
There is no specific treatment currently available to treat Rotavirus diarrhea.
As with the other diarrheas, the cornerstones of Rotavirus diarrhea treatment are fluid replacement with
ORS and zinc treatment, which reduces the severity and duration of diarrhea. Severe dehydration may
require hospitalization for treatment with intravenous (IV) fluids.

How to prevent rotavirus diarrhea?
The only specific intervention strategy for prevention of Rotavirus diarrhea is immunization.

#Chapter 4: ROTAVIRUS
VACCINE IN INDIA


How to store rotavirus vaccine?
Rotavirus vaccine should be stored between 2-8 degrees celsius.  

4.5 Vaccine vial monitor
This is a time -temperature sensitive label that provides an
indication of the cumulative heat to which the vial of rotavirus vaccine has been
exposed. It warns the end user when exposure to heat is likely
to have degraded the vaccine beyond an acceptable level.
The interpretation of the VVM is similar to the other vaccines
in UIP. Focus on the central square. Its colour will change
progressively. As long as the colour of this square is lighter
than the colour of the outer circle, the vaccine can be used. As
soon as the colour of the central square is the same or darker
than the outer circle, the vial should be discarded.

			

4.6 Vaccination schedule, dosage and route of administration:

Each dose of the Rotavirus vaccine is 2.5 ml. It is to be given orally at 6, 10 and 14 weeks, The upper age limit
for administering the 1st dose of Rotavirus vaccine is 1 year.
No booster dose of Rotavirus vaccine is recommended. 


If the child has received first dose of Rotavirus vaccine within 12 months of age, subsequent two more
doses of the vaccine should be given at an interval of at least 4 weeks between two doses to complete the
course. There is no booster dose required for the Rotavirus vaccine.
Infants who have already received their first or second dose of OPV and pentavalent vaccine and are now
coming for their second or third dose of OPV and pentavalent vaccine should not be initiated with Rotavirus
vaccine. Such infants should receive the remaining vaccines as per schedule.


The preferred sequence for administration of vaccines to a child after introduction of Rotavirus
vaccine is
At 6 weeks: OPV (2 drops oral) – Rotavirus vaccine (2.5 ml oral ) – fIPV (0.1ml intradermal) – PCV (0.5 ml
IM wherever applicable) – Pentavalent vaccine (0.5 ml IM).
At 10 weeks: OPV (2 drops oral) – Rotavirus vaccine (2.5 ml oral) – Pentavalent vaccine (0.5 ml IM).
At 14 weeks: OPV (2 drops oral) – Rotavirus vaccine (2.5 ml oral) – fIPV (0.1ml intradermal) – PCV (0.5
ml IM)* – Pentavalent vaccine (0.5 ml IM).
Figure 8: Sequence of administration of vaccines

OPV: Oral Polio Vaccine, RVV: Rotavirus Vaccine, fIPV: fractional-dose IPV, PCV: Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine, Penta: Pentavalent Vaccine

##How to adminster rotavirus vaccine?

###Step 1
Take out one vaccine vial and one diluent vial from the vaccine carrier and place it on the table.
Check and ensure that VVM placed on top of the vaccine vial is in usable stage, and the vaccine is within the expiry date.
Check and ensure that the diluent is within the expiry date.
Next, take out two 6 ml oral syringes and one adapter. Check and ensure that 6 ml oral syringes are within the expiry
date.
Remove the cap of the diluent vial and the vaccine vial.

###Step 2

Remove the adapter
from the packing by
tearing the wrapper
from the wider side of
the adapter.
Caution: Hold the
adapter from the
body so that you do
not touch the tip and
the pointed end of
the adapter.

###Step 3

Fix the
adapter from
the wider end
by piercing
the rubber cap
of the diluent.

###Step 4

Peel open the
syringe from the
plunger side.
Draw 3 ml of air into
the syringe.

###Step 5

Fix the syringe on the
adapter.
Push the air inside the
diluent vial.

###Step 6

Withdraw
entire
amount
of diluent
into the
syringe.

###Step 7

Hold the adapter and
remove the diluent
vial, ensuring that
the adapter remains
with the syringe
containing the
diluent.

###Step 8

Fix this adapter
along with the
syringe containing
the diluent over
the vaccine vial by
piercing the rubber
cap.

###Step 9

Push the entire amount
of diluent into the
vaccine vial.
Remove the syringe
from the adapter
ensuring that adapter
remains with the vial.
Now draw 1ml of air into
the syringe.
Attach the syringe
into the adapter and
push the air into the
reconstituted vaccine.

###Step 10

Draw 2.5 ml of
reconstituted
vaccine.
Separate the syringe
containing vaccine,
ensuring that
adapter remains with
the vial.

###Step 11

Administer the first
dose (2.5 ml) of the
vaccine orally to the
infant.
The administration
should be slow with
the nozzle pointed
towards the inner
cheek (buccal cavity)
of the infant.
Discard the syringe
after administration.

###Step 12

Take a fresh 6 mL
oral syringe and
connect it to the
vial adapter on the
vaccine vial.
If there is a gap
between the
administration of
the first and second
dose, leave the
syringe connected
to the vial adapter so
as to ensure that the
vial is not open.

###Step 13

Administer the
second dose (2.5 ml)
of the vaccine orally
to the infant.
The administration
should be slow with
the nozzle pointed
towards the inner
cheek (buccal cavity)
of the infant.
Discard the syringe
after administration.

Remember
Rotavirus vaccine is safe and can be given with other UIP vaccines.
Mild illness such as upper respiratory tract infection or mild diarrhea does not mean that Rotavirus vaccine should not be given.

What are the side effects of rotavirus vaccine?
Rotavirus vaccine has a good safety record; minor symptoms such as diarrhea, vomiting and irritability may
occur in some children. In rare cases, intussusception has been associated with some Rotavirus vaccines.
Surveillance measures are recommended for documenting this rare serious event.

Remember
On reconstitution, date and time must be written on the vaccine vial.
Rotavirus vaccine should not be used beyond 4 hours after reconstitution.
Return the partially used vials to the Cold Chain Point after the session along with the other used
vaccine vials.
The partially used vaccine vials returned from the session sites are to be kept separately in the ILR
for at least 48 hours or till the next session, whichever is earlier.

Key Points
It is an oral, freeze dried vaccine.
It has to be reconstituted with the diluent supplied with the vaccine.
Each dose of the vaccine is 2.5 ml to be administered orally with a 6 ml oral syringe.
Rotavirus vaccine is safe for administration with other UIP vaccines.
The infant can be breast fed immediately after vaccination.
Open vial policy is not applicable for Rotavirus vaccine.
The vaccine vial once reconsituted, should not be used beyond 4 hours.
During the initial introduction of Rotavirus vaccine, only infants coming for first dose of Pentavalent
vaccine and OPV will be started with Rotavirus vaccine schedule. Infants coming for the 2nd or 3rd
doses of OPV and pentavalent vaccine will not be started with Rotavirus vaccine.
The upper age limit for giving first dose of Rotavirus vaccine is one year. If the child has received
first dose of Rotavirus vaccine by 12 months of age, subsequent two more doses of the vaccine
should be given with an interval of 4 weeks to complete the course.


5.2.7 Conditioning of ice packs for sessions
When ice packs are taken out from the Deep freezer, they are usually at a temperature between -150C to
-200C. They need to be kept at room temperature for a certain period of time to allow the temperature at
the core of the ice pack to rise to 00C. This process is called “conditioning” (Figure 12):
At start of session day, take all the frozen ice-packs you need from the Deep freezer.
Lay these out on a table leaving a 5-cm space all round each icepack.
Lay out icepacks, preferably in single rows but never in more than two rows.
Check to see if ice inside the icepacks has begun to melt and some condensation, or droplets of water
appears on the surface of ice packs.
Shake the icepacks and listen for the sound of water.
An ice pack is adequately “conditioned” as soon as beads of water cover its surface and the crackling
sound of water is heard on shaking it.
Conditioning is done to prevent freezing of the freeze sensitive vaccines.

The inventory system should ensure that vaccines with the nearest expiry date are used first in a system
known as EEFO (early-expiry, first-out). Expiry date should always be checked whenever a vial is opened.
Never use vaccines beyond the expiry date.


#Key instructions for health workers while administering the Rotavirus vaccine:

Step 1

Check the following details of Rotavirus vaccine before opening the vial.
Name of the vaccine
Manufacturer name
Date of manufacture
Expiry date
Batch number
VVM status
Visible damage

Step 2

Before administration of Rotavirus vaccine, confirm the age of the beneficiary
Three doses of Rotavirus vaccine are to be given at 6, 10 and 14 weeks of age along
with other UIP vaccines
The upper age limit for administering 1st dose of Rotavirus vaccine is one year under
UIP.

Step 3

Before administration of RVV, check for any contraindication.
Don’t give Rotavirus vaccine to infants with
History of hypersensitivity to any component of the vaccine.
History of uncorrected congenital malformation of the gastrointestinal tract that
would predispose the infant for intussusception.
Severe combined Immunodeficiency disease (SCID) as cases of gastroenteritis
associated with other live Rotavirus vaccines have been reported in infants with
SCID.
History of intussusception

Step 4

Administer 2.5 ml of Rotavirus vaccine orally using the 6 ml oral syringe supplied
with the vaccine.
Remember this Rotavirus vaccine is an oral freeze dried vaccine, so it has to be
reconstituted with a diluent supplied along with the vaccine.
The entire amount of diluent should be used to reconstitute the two dose vial
of Rotavirus vaccine. The adapter and one 6ml oral syringe will be used for the
withdrawal of diluent for reconstitution. The same adapter along with the same oral
syringe will then be used for withdrawal and administration of 1st dose (2.5 ml) of
reconstituted vaccine. The 2nd oral syringe with the help of adapter will be used for
withdrawal and administration of 2nd dose (2.5 ml). The syringe is strictly for oral use.


Step 5

Record the date of administration of Rotavirus vaccine on the immunization card and
RCH register.

Step 6

Return the unopened and opened Rotavirus vaccine vials after the immunization
session to the cold chain point as per guidelines.