1
GUIDELINES FOR NATIONAL PROGRAMME
FOR  PREVENTION & MANAGEMENT OF  
SICKLE CELL DISEASE  
National Sickle Cell Anaemia Elimination Mission 2023
Ministry of  Health & Fam ily Welfare
Governm ent of  Ind ia
20232
1
India’s past, history, present and India’s future will 
never be complete without the tribal community.
Tribal populations in India share a disproportionate 
burden of sickle cell disease. We will usher in a social 
revolution against this disease and bring in the most 
advanced science and technology to tackle it.
We are committed to improve the quality of life of 
people with sickle cell disease and ensure future 
generation is safe from it.
Hon’ble Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi3
4
5
7
9
11
13
15
1
BACKGROUND  2
OVERVIEW OF SICKLE CELL DISEASE 4
NATIONAL SICKLE CELL ANAEMIA ELIMINATION MISSION  9
PRIMARY PREVENTION - AWARENESS GENERATION &  
PREMARITAL COUNSELLING 11
SECONDARY PREVENTION: UNIVERSAL SCREENING AND  
EARLY DIAGNOSIS  15
HOLISTIC MANAGEMENT & CONTINUUM OF CARE 22
NATIONAL SICKLE CELL ANAEMIA ELIMINATION  
PORTAL  30
OPERATIONAL FRAMEWORK 32
ADVANCED RESEARCH   41
SUMMARY & CONCLUSION  41
ANNEXURES  42
LIST OF CONTRIBUTERS 60TABLE OF CONTENTS2
BACKGROUND
Hemoglobinopathies are the commonest genetic disorders worldwide. They include thalassemia 
and abnormal variant hemoglobin such as Hemoglobin S, D, E, etc. They constitute a major burden 
of disease, mainly in malaria-endemic countries but have now become global due to population 
migration. World Health Assembly in 2006 passed a resolution urging member states “to develop, 
implement and reinforce comprehensive national, integrated programmes for the prevention and management of 
hemoglobinopathies1.” The member states were also urged to develop and strengthen medical genetics 
services and community education and training.
An estimated 7% of the world’s population carries an abnormal hemoglobin gene, while about 300,000-
500,000 are born annually with significant hemoglobin disorders. They consist of two major groups 
– Thalassemia and Sickle cell syndromes. Sickle cell syndromes are more frequent and constitute 70% 
of affected births worldwide.
Sickle Cell Disease (SCD) is a hemoglobin disorder that requires lifelong management and contributes 
to infant, childhood as well as adult morbidity and mortality.
SCD, as a genetic condition, is widespread among the tribal population in India where about 1 in 
86 births among STs have SCD2. Hemoglobinopathies are more widely prevalent among the tribal 
population than the non-tribal communities in India. The disease has a higher prevalence in States 
like Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, 
Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Karnataka, Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, 
and Kerala. Due to population migration, the disease is also seen in non-tribal population subgroups.
MoHFW report of the expert committee on tribal health (2018)3, highlights the fact that tribal 
communities in India have poorer health indicators, greater burden of morbidity and mortality, 
and also limited access to healthcare services in comparison to the rest of the population. The 
report has listed SCD as one of the 10 priority problems in tribal health that affect the tribal people 
disproportionately. Addressing the health concerns in tribal population groups, the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs has also set up a “Tribal Health Cell” as a collaborative effort, to work in close partnership 
with MoHFW to facilitate the strengthening of primary health care systems and health research in 
tribal areas.
For the reduction in the prevalence of sickle cell anaemia, several national and state-specific 
initiatives have been planned and undertaken. Identifying SCD as a genetic blood disorder affecting 
tribal populations in Central, Western, and Southern India, NHM prepared and disseminated 
comprehensive guidelines to control and prevent Hemoglobinopathies, including SCD. This includes 
prenatal diagnosis, counselling, and setting up of early intervention centers to prevent and treat the 
complications arising from the disease. Through the guidelines, the detection and genetic counselling 
of parents with Sickle Cell trait can help in guiding parents to understand the risk of sickle cell 
disease in the offspring.
1 WHO resolution on Sickle Cell Disease (WHA59.20) and Thalassemia (EB118.R1), 29 May 2006. (http://www.who. int/ 
genomics/WHO-TIF_genetics_final.pdf)
2 https://tribal.nic.in/
3 https://nhsrcindia.org/sites/default/files/2021-07/Tribal%20Health%20in%20India-Detailed%20Report.pdf3
At present there is no permanent cure for the disease. However, with good management of the 
disease, severity, and complications can be curtailed to improve the quality of life and life span 
of the people suffering from the disease. With this focus, the guidelines for National Sickle Cell 
Anaemia Elimination Mission have been developed, to emphasize an integrated comprehensive 
approach for both screening and management of SCD with a special focus on prevention and control. 
These guidelines entail a strategic roadmap for the prevention and management of sickle cell disease 
amongst tribal populations as well as non-tribal people in selected geographies of certain states where 
the disease prevalence is high. While in its initial stage, the mission would prioritize its intervention 
in the high prevalence and tribal states, the plan would subsequently expand to include all states/UTs 
in a phase-wise manner with an incremental approach.
The roadmap has set a target of screening all population up to 18 years of age in the first year and the 
remaining age group (up to 40 years) in the following years in the said populations and geographies. 
This would be integrated with Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Programme (RBSK) hemoglobinopathies 
screening approach, and existing strategies would be leveraged to ensure the screening and early 
diagnosis of SCD in all individuals across levels of care with a focus on preventive and promotive 
care at the primary level health care facilities.
The roadmap also includes actions for advancing effective care and management of the disease. It 
also strives to innovate and improve care delivery for people living with sickle cell disease through 
the engagement of multiple stakeholders.4
OVERVIEW OF SICKLE CELL DISEASE
Blood is a specialized body fluid and has four main components: plasma, red 
blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Hemoglobin (Hb) is a protein-
based molecule found in the red blood cells (RBC) that carries oxygen in our 
body and gives blood its red color. Normal red blood cells are biconcave, have 
no nucleus, and being flexible can easily change shape, which helps them to 
fit and move easily through the smallest blood vessels called capillaries. Sickle 
Cell Disease is an inherited red blood cell disorder, wherein the mutation in 
the gene causes the formation of atypical hemoglobin. This causes RBCs to 
lose their normal shape and become C-shaped, like sickles or crescent moons and lose flexibility. 
These rigid, sticky cells can get stuck in small blood vessels and cause clogging of blood vessels 
causing slowing or blocking blood flow and oxygen to parts of the body. It is one of the most common 
monogenic disorders globally with an autosomal recessive inheritance. James Herrick first described 
the characteristic sickle-shaped red cells and Linus Pauling and his colleagues showed that sickle 
hemoglobin (HbS) had an altered electrophoretic mobility and defined the molecular disease in 1949. 
Normal red blood cells can live up to 120 days but sickle cells only live for about 10 to 20 days. The 
primary pathophysiology is based on the polymerization of deoxy HbS with the formation of long 
fibers within the RBCs causing a distorted sickle shape and leading to increased hemolysis and vaso-
occlusion by sickle red cells. Also, sickle cells get destroyed by the spleen because of their shape and 
stiffness. Sickled cells get stuck in this filter and die. With fewer healthy red blood cells circulating in 
the body, a person becomes chronically anaemic and sickled cells also damage the spleen. It results 
in various complications like anaemia (Sickle Cell Anaemia), frequent infections, pain, and swelling 
as well as chronic damage to various organs in the body including the brain, liver, lungs, etc.
TYPES OF SICKLE CELL DISEASE: 
Normal Human Hemoglobin A (HbA), also known as adult hemoglobin, (Hemoglobin A1 or α2β2) 
consists of two subunits of beta-globin and two subunits of alpha-globin. These two genes have to 
function normally and in tandem to produce normal hemoglobin in human children and adults. 
When faulty hemoglobin replaces normal hemoglobin (HbA), the person can be a sickle cell carrier 
or have sickle cell disease. A person can be a sickle cell carrier or have sickle cell disease if normal 
hemoglobin (HbA) is replaced by faulty sickle hemoglobin. Sickle hemoglobin (HbS) is a result of a 
point mutation in the beta-globin chain. If only one subunit of beta globin is affected, the person has 
a trait, and if both are affected, the person has sickle cell disease. Patients with sickle cell trait inherit 
HbS from one parent and HbA from the other, making them heterozygous and carriers of disease. 
Patients with sickle cell disease inherit two genes that code for HbS from both parents, making them 
homozygous. At times a patient may inherit the beta thalassemia gene from one parent and the sickle 
cell gene from another parent
The most common types of Sickle cell hemoglobinopathies are – HbSS, HbS Beta Thalassemia, and 
sickle cell trait.
HbSS: People who have the HbSS form of SCD, inherit sickle cell genes (“S”), from both parents. This 
is  commonly called sickle cell anaemia / disease and is usually the most severe form of the disease.
HbS beta thalassemia: People who have this form of SCD, inherit one sickle cell gene (“S”) from one 
parent and one gene for beta thalassemia, another type of hemoglobinopathy, from the other parent. 
Those with HbS beta thalassemia usually have a severe form of SCD. 
5
If one p arent has sic kle cel l trait and the other has sic kle cel l disease, then c hildren ha ve a 50% c hance o f being dis eased 
and 50% o f being carriersIf both parents ha ve sic kle cel l disease, there is a 100% c hance t hat their c hildren wil l be born wi th the dis ease
If one pa rent is no rmal a nd the other has sic kle cel l disease, then c hildren ha ve a 100% c hance o f being carriersIf one p arent has sic kle cel l trait and the other is no rmal, then c hildren ha ve a 50% c hance o f being no rmal a nd 50% 
chance o f being carriers
If one p arent has sic kle cel l trait and the other has sic kle cel l disease, then c hildren ha ve a 50% c hance o f being dis eased 
and 50% o f being carriers
If both parents ha ve sic kle cel l disease, there is a 100% c hance t hat their c hildren wil l be born wi th the dis ease
If both pa rents ha ve sic kle cel l trait, their c hildren ha ve a 25% c hance o f being dis eased, a 25% c hance o f being no rmal, 
and a 50% c hance o f being carriersIf both parents ha ve sic kle cel l trait, their c hildren ha ve a 25% c hance o f being dis eased, a 25% c hance o f being no rmal, 
and a 50% c hance o f being carriers
If one pa rent has sic kle cel l trait and the other is no rmal, then c hildren ha ve a 50% c hance o f being no rmal a nd 50% 
chance o f being carriersNormal hemog lobin Sickle cell tra it Sickle cell dis ease
COMPLICATIONS
Individuals with SCD suffer from both acute and chronic complications, which include recurring 
episodes of pain commonly called vaso-occlusive crisis (VOC) - acute chest syndrome (ACS), aseptic 
necrosis of bone, micro infarction of spleen, brain and kidney, infections, stroke, and organ damage 
affecting every organ in the body. Recent studies reiterated that the individual with SCD may incur 
red cell dehydration, abnormal adhesion of RBCs to the vascular endothelium, inflammatory events 
and activation of all cells in the vessels, and abnormalities of nitric oxide metabolism leading to 
increased thrombotic complications and multi-organ disease as well as other complications like hand 6
and foot syndrome (dactylitis) presenting as swelling of hands and feet. Given the effects of Sickle cell 
disease on the spleen, the immune system also gets affected in individuals with this disease. Thus, 
individuals with SCD have weakened immune systems and are more likely to get repeated infections.
These chronic complications require care coordination from a multidisciplinary team which includes 
primary care teams, primary care physicians (PCPs) and hematologists among other specialists. 
Among SCD-related complications, VOC events have long been identified as a higher risk factor for 
death and the most common cause of hospital admission among SCD patients. There is a need for 
trained medical staff and the availability of the required infrastructure to deal with these complications.
Details of complication and management at each level are given in Annexure 6
PREVALENCE OF SICKLE GENE IN TRIBAL COMMUNITIES OF INDIA
India has the largest density of tribal population globally. As per Census 2011, India has an 8.6% 
tribal population which is 67.8 million across the Indian states. The MoHFW tribal health expert 
committee report has listed sickle cell disease as one of the 10 special problems in tribal health that 
affect the tribal people disproportionately, thus making this an important intervention.
The first description of sickle hemoglobin in India was by Lehman and Cutbush in 1952 among the 
tribal populations in the Nilgiri hills of south India. In the same year, Dunlop and Mazumder also 
reported the presence of sickle hemoglobin in the tea garden workers of upper Assam who were 
migrant labourers from tribal groups in Bihar and Odisha. In another large multi-centric study, 
15200 tribes belonging to 14 primitive tribes from Maharashtra, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, and Odisha 
were screened for SCD. The HbS allele frequency varied from 0.011 to 0.120 and beta-thalassemia 
allele frequency varied from 0.005 to 0.024 and around 26.2% were associated with iron deficiency 
anemia also.
Since then, many population groups have been screened, and based on various studies, it is found 
that States with prevalence of SCD includes- Gujarat, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Maharashtra, Bihar, 
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Odisha, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Andhra 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Uttar Pradesh & Assam. Ministry of Tribal Affairs conducted a screening 
of the tribal population in collaboration with ICMR and the Department of Biotechnology. Out of 
the 1,13,83,664 persons screened in different States, about 8.75% (9,96,368) tested positive (Trait – 
9,49,057, Disease – 47,311).
Data from published sources has been collated with reference to the project being conducted by ICMR 
using variable screening methodology in various States and Districts (Figure 1 )7
NIIH, Maharashtra
Total-13,135
AA-11912 (90.69%)
AS-1172 (8.92%)
SS-49 (0.37%)
Sβ -2 (0.01%)SEWA, Gujrat
Total-6265
AA-4718 (75.31 %)
AS-1442 (23.02 %)
SS-105 (1.68 %)NIIRNCD, Rajasthan 
Total-4164
AA-3549 (85.23%)
AS-576(13.83 %)
SS-23 (0.55%)
NAWA, Tamil Nadu
Total-2147
AA-1271 (59.20 %)
AS-859 (40.01 %)
SS-9 (0.42 %)NIRTH, Madhya Pradesh
Total-4244
AA-3544 (83.51%)
AS-605 (14.26%)
SS-53 (1.25 %)
Sβ –6 (0.1 %)
RMRC, Odisha
Total-3166
AA-2765 (87.33 %)
AS-353 (11.15 %)
SS-48 (1.52 %)NIRRCH, Maharashtra
Total-3956
AA-3570 (90.24 %)
AS-301 (7.61 %)
SS-17 (0.43 %)
Sβ –5 (0.12 %)Tribes
Thakur
Gond
Maravi
Tribes
Vasava
Tribes
Gond
Pardhan
ManaTribes
KandhaTribes
Garasiya
Bheel
Gameti
Tribes
Varli
Malhar Koli
Tribes
Irular
Paniya175 km125 km
62.5 km
112.5 km
35 km200 km
87.5 km
Total: 37,077 
AS: 5308 (14.32 %) 
SCD: 304 (0.82 %)Ref: Assessment of neonatal screening 
approaches for SCD and the effect of   early 
intervention in management of the disease 
in tribal populations 
(ICMR Project; 3rdYear ongoing)
Fig 1 The individual states and district screening were done at different time points and using 
different technology. The screening methodology was also variable- from targeted screening of 
symptomatic individuals to population screening etc.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS OF SICKLE CELL DISEASE 
(SCD)
SCD has a significant macroeconomic effect on the Indian economy, given the severe complications 
of the disease, and the need for routine and lifelong care. These are add-ons when linked to already 
existing social and psychological problems attributed to clinical symptoms, depressive symptoms, 
absenteeism and deterioration in productivity. The financial implications include both the direct and 
indirect costs of the disease. Direct costs are those that are met by the healthcare system; for sickle 
cell disease, these include the cost of screening, primary and emergency care visits, cost of drugs, 
hospitalizations, blood transfusions, bone marrow transplants, and other out-of-pocket expenditures 
borne by the patient. Indirect costs are those met by families and wider society. The first is due to lost 
productivity because of parents’ missing days of work to look after their children. The second is the 
future loss to the economy as sickle cell disease deaths mainly occur in children and young adults 
causing early deaths that erode the future workforce.
Given the association with health care costs due to long-term management, and aforementioned 
associated factors, this may also lead to financial hardship for population subgroups of middle and 
lower economic status.8
Figure 2: Major contributing factors to direct and indirect costs of sickle cell disease
Cost of sickle cell Disease Direct costCost of healthcare
Primary Care visits
Emergency care visits
Hospitalizations
Blood transfusion
bone marrow transplant
Indirect costCurrent loss of productivity Presenteeism/Absenteeism
Future productivity lossPremature Childhood 
Mortality9
NATIONAL SICKLE CELL ANAEMIA 
ELIMINATION MISSION
GOAL
Eliminate sickle cell disease as a public health problem in India before 2047
PRIORITY AREAS FOR MANAGEMENT OF SICKLE CELL DISEASE
To achieve the aforementioned time-bound goal of eliminating sickle cell disease as a public health 
problem in India, there is a need for increasing awareness about the disease in the community, 
implementing mass screening activities for early identification, providing diagnostic and therapeutic 
care at primary level with linkages, building a strong network of diagnosis and linkages, implementing 
robust monitoring system, strengthening the existing primary health care mechanism to incorporate 
SCD related strategies, capacity building of primary, secondary and tertiary health care teams and 
building cost-effective intensive interventions at higher care facilities.
The overall aim is to enable access to affordable and quality health care for all SCD patients, and to 
lower the prevalence through awareness, change of practices, and screening interventions.
OBJECTIVES
1. Provision of affordable, accessible, and quality care to all SCD patients
2. To reduce the prevalence of SCD and sickle cell trait
These objectives would be attained through strategies spanning awareness generation, strengthening 
of screening and testing facilities, strengthening primary care services, strengthening of laboratory 
services for screening and early diagnosis, facilitation of management & treatment, establishing 
linkages across levels of care, inter-sectoral convergence towards holistic approach and linkages with 
social security schemes/packages.
Strategic Pillars
I. Primary prevention strategies:
•	 Primary prevention strategies focus on awareness generation and pre-marital and pre-
conceptional counselling to prevent the conception of a child with homozygous genotype. 
•	Prevention requires setting up genetic counselling and testing interventions in high 
prevalence districts to prevent sickle cell disease in the offspring.  Genetic counselling and 
health promotion activities can lead to substantial reduction in the number of children born 
with the disease.
•	 Widespread community involvement and support are essential as there are existing 
diversity of cultures and opinions about a number of issues relevant to genetics, such as 
human reproduction issues.
II. Secondary Prevention and Screening:
 Secondary prevention focuses on the following components related to early diagnosis and care 
of sickle cell disease.
•	Screening for detection of Sickle Cell Trait to reduce the birth of children affected with Sickle 
Cell Disease and screening for early detection of sickle cell disease to achieve a reduction in 
mortality and morbidity with improvement in quality of life of the affected.10
III. Holistic management and continuum of care
•	 Management of persons with sickle cell disease at primary, secondary, and tertiary health 
care levels
•	 Advanced diagnostic and treatment modalities at tertiary health care facilities
•	 Integration with AYUSH
•	 Patient support system
•	 Community Adoption
•	 Rehabilitation
SCOPE OF SICKLE CELL PROGRAMME
The program shall be carried out in a mission mode covering the entire population from zero to 
40 years of age. In the first year the priority will be given to population between zero to eighteen 
years of age which will be followed by screening of the entire population up to 40 years of age in the 
second and third year. The program shall be a part of the National Health Mission and shall focus on 
universal population-based screening, prevention, and management of sickle cell disease in all tribal 
and other highly prevalent areas of India. While in its initial stage, the mission would prioritize its 
intervention in the high prevalence states, the plan would subsequently expand to include all states/
UTs in a phase-wise manner with an incremental approach. The mission aims to cover 7 crore people 
with screening, counseling for prevention, and care for people with SCD in three years.
Initially, the focus shall be on 17 states with higher prevalence of SCD viz., Madhya Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, 
Telangana, Karnataka, Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and Kerala.
A targeted approach for screening may be adopted in non-tribal districts based on prevalence of the 
Sickle Cell Disease as assessed during routine facility-based testing of antenatal mothers in the 1st 
trimester, at the primary health care facilities in the State.
The programme would be integrated with existing mechanisms and strategies under NHM to 
ensure the utilization of existing resources and also minimize the duplication of efforts. For example, 
the established platform of Rashtriya Bal Swathya Karyakram (RBSK), Pradhan Mantri Surakshit 
Matritva Abhiyan (PMSMA), and Anaemia Mukt Bharat would be leveraged to achieve the targets 
for the Sickle Cell mission11
PRIMARY PREVENTION - AWARENESS 
GENERATION & PREMARITAL COUNSELLING
Multiple platforms shall be utilized for awareness generation for the prevention and control of SCDs. 
Enhancing the utilization of prenatal screening, premarital genetic counselling, screening  of all up 
to 40 years of age, and counselling services shall be the focus of prevention awareness. The Rashtriya 
Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK) & Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram (RKSK) of the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare would be leveraged for awareness generation. This would be integrated 
with the RBSK hemoglobinopathies screening approach, and existing strategies would be leveraged 
to ensure the screening and early diagnosis of SCD in all individuals across levels of care.
AT INDIVIDUAL /HOUSEHOLD LEVEL 
ASHAs, community health volunteers, local NGOs, etc., shall be engaged in raising awareness towards  
SCDs through home visits. ASHA, as part of her routine population enumeration and empanelment 
process, would undertake a line listing of identified SCD patients within her catchment area. As a 
routine set of activities, ASHAs are already preparing a list of eligible couples, which may be linked 
with the programme to identify and provide genetic counselling and mobilizing the couples to the 
nearest Ayushman Bharat Health and Wellness Centre (AB-HWC) for SCD screening, prevention, 
and clinical management. 
Individuals with known or detected SCDs would also be encouraged to register on Sickle Cell 
Disease Support Corner, which is MoTA’s initiative to bridge the gap between patients and health 
care services in tribal areas. 
AT COMMUNITY LEVEL:
Platforms such as monthly Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committee (VHSNC)/ Mahila 
Arogya Samiti (MAS) meetings, Village/Urban Health Sanitation and Nutrition Days (VHSND/ 
UHND) meetings at Anganwadi, Jan Arogya Samitis in AB-HWC, Arogya Sabha, Self-Help Groups 
(SHG), youth clubs, parent-teachers meetings in schools, etc., shall be leveraged to sensitize people 
on the importance of sickle cell disease and screening service available at AB-HWCs. To complement 
these efforts, the tribal head, key influential individuals among the local tribal and other communities 
shall be engaged. For rural areas or urban slums, places with community gathering such as haat 
bazaar, or fixed-day markets may also be included for generating awareness amongst community 
members on SCD. Locally relevant awareness modalities such as street plays, miking, wall writings 
and paintings, quizzes, etc., shall be undertaken to raise community awareness of sickle cell disease 
and the national mission.
Patients Support Groups (PSG) would be formed, facilitated by the MPWs/ASHA or other frontline 
workers to improve treatment compliance and engaging not only those with the disease condition 
but also family members or caregivers.
Community platforms should develop mechanisms for community level referrals for per-marital and 
per-conceptional screening backed by genetic counselling services. Also, at the level of community, for 
all individuals detected or known as carriers or patients, extended family screening is to be ensured.12
AT SCHOOLS: 
In all blocks with sickle cell disease, Community Health Officers (CHO) at Sub Health Centre – Health 
and Wellness Centre (SHC-HWC) and Medical Officers at Primary Health Centre – Health and 
Wellness Centre (PHC-HWC), Urban Health and Wellness Center (UHWC) Urban Primary Health 
Centre – Health and Wellness Centre (UPHC-HWC) shall conduct talk sessions and counselling at all 
schools & colleges including ‘tribal residential schools, tribal hostels, and Ekalvya Model Residential 
Schools, for early detection of SCD among school going children.
AB-Health and Wellness ambassadors would also be trained to enable them to transact health 
promotion and disease prevention information in the form of interesting activities which would be 
either classroom-based or as an outreach. Teachers shall be educated to identify early symptoms 
of crisis in SCD children so that they can provide paracetamol and hydration in emergency cases. 
Regular reinforcement of messages/ themes through IEC/BCC activities such as interactive activities/
posters/classroom and assembly discussion and field level will need to be undertaken.
Existing mechanisms under School Health Programme would be leveraged to ensure SCD-related 
activities across schools. Parents-teacher meetings would also be utilized as a platform to spread 
awareness in high-prevalence areas.
Those children found to have sickle cell trait will be given plain folic acid through schools and HWC. 
Also, proper counselling and awareness shall be provided to the families. However, proper treatment 
guidelines (eg. hydroxyurea, prophylactic antibiotics,etc.) should be followed up at every stage of the 
disease.
Eklavya Model Residential School (EMRS), one of the flagship initiatives of GoI, would be utilized as 
a platform to undertake and ensure all SCD-related interventions at this level.
AT HEALTH CARE FACILITY LEVEL: 
Counsellors at the primary health care centers will be primarily responsible for providing counselling 
services to all individuals diagnosed positive with Sickle cell disease. The existing counsellors shall 
be leveraged at all the PHC-HWC/UPHC-HWC and shall be trained on sickle cell disease genetic 
counselling.Primary health care teams including CHOs, ANMs, ASHAs, Medical Officers, and 
Staff Nurses in AB-HWC will be trained on all aspects of SCD prevention, control, counselling and 
management. They will organize community awareness events on SCD regularly. The platform of 
Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram (RKSK) and its Adolescent Friendly Health clinics (AHFC) 
shall be used for reaching out to adolescents for awareness generation, screening, and genetic 
counselling.
All the eligible individuals and couples identified as positive or at risk either at the community level 
or  at  SHC-HWC/UHWC will be referred to the counsellor at PHC-HWC/UPHC-HWC for further 
advice. Advise on pregnancy continuation shall be provided in case both parents are identified as 
carriers. Higher centers will also  be engaged in providing counselling services to walk-in patients or 
patients referred from lower-level facilities13
SICKLE CELL CARDS:
Counsellors at the primary health care centers shall be using sickle cell cards for the purpose of pre-
marital and pre-conceptional counselling by matching the cards of prospective matches. Matching of 
the cards will show the chances of their children being born with  SCD or SCT. Every individual who 
is screened for SCD will be provided a Sickle cell card. The card will show the status of the individual 
viz, Normal, Carrier or Diseased. The cards are color coded separately for male (blue) and female 
(pink). Based on the card’s status, the individual will receive treatment and counselling services.
The card has details such as gender, test report (Sickle cell disease/ Sickle cell carrier/ Normal) on the 
front side of the card. The rear side of the card has details on possible outcomes of conception if any 
person with either sickle cell disease or carrier marries. 
While matching the cards they should be placed together and held against the light, the holes 
coinciding will give the possibility of having disease or trait in the child. The following are the 
matching possibilities:
• If two individuals having sickle cell disease marry, there is a 100% chance that their children will 
be born with SCD
• If a sickle cell disease individual and a sickle cell trait individual marry, there is a 50% chance that 
their children will be born with the disease and 50% chance that their children will be carriers
• If a sickle cell disease individual and a normal individual marry, there is a 100% chance that their 
children will be born with sickle cell trait
• If two individuals having sickle cell trait marry, their children have 25% chance of being diseased, 
25% of being normal and 50% chance of being carriers
• If a sickle cell disease trait and a normal individual marry, their children have 50% chance of 
being normal and 50% chance of being carriers
Back                                Front Back                                Front
Revised Design of Sickle Cell Card - 16-02-2023
14
IEC AND MASS MEDIA:
The Health Promotion strategy recommended by the National Health Policy 2017 emphasizes 
institutionalizing intersectoral coordination at national and sub-national levels to optimize health 
outcomes, through the constitution of bodies that have representation from relevant non-health 
ministries. This should be in line with the emergent “Health in All” approach as a complement to 
Health for All, thus making the base for all planned IEC/BCC activities. Under this program, Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs will play a pivotal role in awareness generation. The mentees and mentors of the GOAL 
(Going Online as Leaders) program run by the MOTA with Facebook will be used as ambassadors for 
generating awareness on health issues including Sickle cell disease. TV/radio jingles would be used 
to create awareness about the facilities provided by the Government for Sickle Cell  patients and to 
disseminate the success stories of sickle cell patients. World Sickle Cell Day is marked every year on 
19 June to raise awareness about sickle cell disease, and this can be included in the Annual Health 
Calendar across AB-HWCs.
Existing platforms for IEC within NHM and MoTA would be utilized for spreading awareness and 
information on SCD. (Details of different IEC strategies are given in Annexure 3)
ENGAGEMENT OF CBOS/NGOS:
NGOs working in the area in the sector of health, especially tribal health shall also be utilized for 
mobilization, awareness, and providing pre-marital counselling and prenatal screening  services. The 
NGO involvement framework under NHM may also be referred to while engaging with an NGO in 
these areas.15
SECONDARY PREVENTION: UNIVERSAL 
SCREENING AND EARLY DIAGNOSIS
Universal screening of all populations up to the age of 40 years will be done using a mass screening 
approach. In the first year priority will be given to population upto eighteen years and then the entire 
population up to 40 years will be screened subsequently and incrementally. In each district, blocks 
with a high prevalence of population with sickle cell disease would be identified for saturation of 
screening. However, target groups will be defined to utilize the support of various other programmes 
like Rashtriya Bal Swastya Karyakram (RBSK), and Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana 
(PMSSY) to cover the population under these schemes. 
Target group Purpose Approach
1. New-born/Infant New-born screening is a suitable 
strategy to initiate prophylactic 
treatment of diagnosed cases to 
reduce under-5 mortalityFacility-based screening at the secondary 
or tertiary care facilities, by the trained 
health worker
The commonly used technologies for 
Newborn Screening for SCD include high 
performance liquid chromatography 
(HPLC), Isoelectric focusing (IEF) and 
capillary electrophoresis (CZE) .Citrate 
agar electrophoresis is not affected by 
the high amount of Hb F and can be used 
for new-born testing for sickle cell. 
2. Children from 6 months 
to 10 years of ageScreening of children for 
prophylactic treatment and early 
managementScreening of children by RBSK teams 
either camp based or in Anganwadis / 
Schools / Ashramshalas / EMRS
3. Adolescent Screening of adolescents can be 
a sustainable and cost-effective 
strategy At primary care facilities or outreach 
camps, Rashtriya Kishore Swastya 
Karyakram shall be leveraged for the 
awareness and screening of adolescents
4. Premarital Preventing higher risk couple from 
getting marriedAt primary care facilities or outreach 
camps
5. Antenatal screening Two provide a couple information 
and option for reproductive 
decision making including 
prenatal testingAntenatal screening of all pregnant 
mothers in sickle anemia-affected 
geographies shall include compulsory 
screening for SCD along with other tests 
to high-risk risk pregnancies. 
The Pradhan Mantri Surakshit Matritva 
Abhiyan (PMSMA) program,Janani 
Suraksha Yojana (JSY), Janani Shishu 
Suraksha Karyakaram (JSSK )would be 
leveraged for this.
6. Prenatal diagnosis (If 
required)To reduce the birth of child with 
sickle cell diseaseAt the tertiary care facilities
7. Cascade screening Screening of extended family 
members of carriers and sickle cell 
positive people.Outreach screening and facility-based 
camps may be adopted16
FACILITY-BASED SCREENING AT SHC-HWC AND PHC-HWC 
On a daily basis, opportunistic screening shall be conducted for people attending the outpatient 
services at the SHC-HWC/UHWC & PHC/UPHC-HWC. At SHC-HWC for screening and confirmation 
GoI-approved paper-based Point of care test shall be used as one step confirmatory test.
The  GoI -approved electrophoresis-based Point of care test shall be used at  the PHC-HWCs and 
UPHC-HWCs for screening and confirmation of diagnosis .If the POC is not available  at the facility 
then solubility  test  can be used for screening purpose. If screening by solubility test or doubt for 
other haemoglobinopathy refer patients to District hospital for confirmation through electrophoresis/
HPLC.
The individuals belonging to the following categories  shall be prioritized for screening for sickle cell 
diseases and sickle cell trait.
• Antenatal screening (early 1st trimester) of all pregnant women for sickle cell carrier status. If 
any pregnant woman is found to be a sickle cell carrier, then her husband too would be tested  
for carrier status
• Prenatal screening including partner screening of the antenatal woman who is positive for sickle 
cell trait or disease.
• Universal screening of all new-born and people upto 40 years of age
• Cascade screening of extended family members of carriers and sickle cell positive people.
• Additionally, dedicated mass screening days will be organized at AB-HWCs by gathering a larger 
number of community members. All the eligible individuals will be mobilized for screening at 
the AB-HWCs by the ASHA and ANM/MPW in collaboration with Jan Arogya Samitis (JAS) and 
Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committees (VHSNC)/Mahila Arogya Samiti (MAS)
OUTREACH SCREENING CAMPS 
Sickle cell screening of people in remote tribal hamlets and other pockets shall be carried out 
through Mobile Medical Units or through dedicated teams. The states may choose other appropriate 
approaches for mass screening camp methods including outsourcing to appropriate agencies.
• All people under 40  years of age would be screened. Initially upto 18 years of age will be prioritized 
for screening, followed by expanded coverage to include pregnant mothers, newborns, extended 
family members of carriers, and disease 
• Solubility test shall be used for the community based screening
• Pre and post-test counselling, pre-marital, and preconception counselling services shall be 
provided for sickle cell disease prevention by a trained nurse/ counsellor of PHC-HWC/UPHC-
HWC
• IEC and BCC activities for sickle cell disease prevention shall be undertaken using audio-visual 
media and other engaging modalities
• Individuals identified positive will be referred to the nearest primary care facility (SHC-HWC/
UHWC/PHC-HWC/UPHC-HWC) for confirmation of diagnosis and treatment initiation17
Also, outreach screening camps on a monthly basis shall be undertaken by SHC-HWC/UHWC 
and PHC-HWC/UPHC-HWC at schools, ashram schools, tribal hostels, and anganwadi. The 
school screening event may be undertaken on the weekly Health and Wellness Day. The Village/
Urban Health Sanitation and Nutrition Days (VHSND/UHND) shall also be leveraged for outreach 
screening camps for screening of children and pregnant mothers. Outreach screening camps at the 
hostel shall be planned quarterly in coordination with the hostel warden and functionaries of the 
tribal department. Deploying suitable teams after the micro-plan, the target population based on age 
and occupational status may be screened.
INTENSIVE SCREENING IN HIGH-PRIORITY AREAS
Mapping exercises shall be conducted throughout the endemic states to identify and grade blocks as 
per the prevalence. Grading of blocks may be done as below:
Grade A: Blocks with prevalence >= 30%
Grade B: Blocks with a prevalence of 15-29%
Grade C: Blocks with a prevalence 3-14%
Grade D: Blocks with a prevalence < 3%
Universal screening is to be initially focused on Grade A and B blocks. This may be followed by Grade 
C blocks. Blocks in Grade D shall require a targeted screening approach.
States may form dedicated teams for universal screening
TOOLS FOR SCREENING AND DIAGNOSIS 
Option 1: One step approach 
GoI-approved Point of Care test * (Confirmatory test)
Option 2: Two-step approach
Mass screening / Initial screening - using Solubility test (Tube based) If found positive for 
Solubility test in field setting
 
Confirmation - using GoI-approved Point of Care confirmatory test at SHC-HWC/UHWC/PHC-
HWC/UPHC-HWC or Hb- HPLC/Capillary zone electrophoresis/Agarose gel/Cellulose Acetate 
Hb Electrophoresis testing at District Hospital
SCREENING TEST: 
Solubility Test:
Test tube-based turbidity tests i.e. SOLUBILITY TEST (For HbS) 
can be used for mass screening of populations. The solubility test 
is rapid (takes just about 5 min), reliable with minimal observer 
variation, does not need any microscope, and requires a very 
small blood sample. It is also a cost-effective test. The sensitivity is 
100% while specificity is on an average 91.66%. Positive Predictive 
value of 80% & Negative Predictive value of 100%.
(Ref: Journal of Research in Medical Education & Ethics 11/2012; 2(3):214- 216)
18
CONFIRMATORY TESTS
- Point of Care (POC)-States may also opt for the Point of Care (POC) test which is a one-step 
confirmatory sickle cell test validated by GoI for mass screening. The average cost of these tests 
should be up to Rs. 100 depending upon the quantity of tests used and should be sourced from 
the GeM portal. This tests can be performed by staff with minimal training. Rapidly distinguish 
normal,  carrier and sickle cell disease. Single test with high sensitivity and specificity As these 
POC tests are confirmatory tests they do not require referral to the district hospital.  
- High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) is a confirmatory test with high sensitivity 
and specificity. It detects most of the Hb Variants.
- The other confirmatory tests are capillary zone electrophoresis or gel electrophoresis.
PRENATAL SCREENING:
Prenatal diagnosis is indicated only in two circumstances as explained below:
Prenatal diagnosis required Prenatal diagnosis not required
If a sickle cell disease individual 
and a sickle cell trait individual 
marry, there is a 50% chance that 
their children will be born with the 
disease and 50% chance that their 
children will be carriersIf two individuals having sickle cell disease marry, there is a 
100% chance that  their children will be born with SCD. They 
should be counselled and helped in an informed decision 
making regarding continuation of the pregnancy
If two individuals having sickle 
cell trait marry, their children have 
25% chance of being diseased, 25% 
of being normal and 50% chance of 
being carriersIf a sickle cell disease individual and a normal individual mar-
ry, there is a 100% chance that their children will be born with 
sickle cell trait
If a sickle cell disease trait and a normal individual marry, their 
children have 50% chance of being normal and 50% chance of 
being carriers
Chorionic Villous Sampling (CVS) is done to determine the disease status of the fetus. This should be 
done only in designated and certified centers .CVS is a prenatal test in which a sample of the foetus 
is drawn from placental tissue during the week eight to twelve weeks of pregnancy. The sample can 
be taken through the cervix (trans-cervical) or the abdominal wall (transabdominal). The test can 
be done as early as 10 weeks of pregnancy. Being a specialized technique, it can be performed by 
experienced specialists only and should be judiciously considered weighing the ‘risks’ and ‘benefits’ 
for the patients. The person and/or family members should be counseled to make an informed choice.
These tests shall be undertaken by specialists, only at select tertiary care centers/SCD Centres of 
Excellence.19
Table: Screening and Diagnosis at various levels of Care
Site of screening Screening/confirmatory tests Person to conduct the test
Initial screening
1. at the community level 
– outreach screening, 
Schools, Anganwadi 
Centres
2. At SHC-HWC/UHWC
3. At PHC/UPHC-HWC• Test tube-based turbidity tests - 
SOLUBILITY TEST (For HbS)** 
+Digital Hemoglobinometers 
for identification of mild and 
moderate Anemia
Or
• GoI-approved electrophoresis 
based Point of Care test as one-
step confirmatory test at PHC / 
UPHCMPW (M/F) at community level
CHO at SHC-HWC level Lab 
technician at PHC-HWC level
At CHC (Rural/ Urban) For screening:
• Solubility test for (for HbS) 
+Digital Hemoglobinometers 
for identification of mild and 
moderate anaemia
For confirmation:
• GoI-approved electrophoresis 
based Point of Care test as one-
step confirmatory testLab technician
At District Hospitals/
DEICFor screening:
• Solubility test for (for HbS) 
+Digital Hemoglobinometers 
for identification of mild and 
moderate anaemia
For confirmation:
• High-Performance Liquid 
Chromatography/Capillary 
zone Electrophoresis for 
confirmation of diagnosisLab technician
AIIMS, state medical 
colleges (selected Medical 
Colleges and/or selected 
Tertiary Care Centres in 
the State)All types of diagnostics available Hematologist / Pathologist
** If hemoglobin is less than 7% the test false negative results are known. Hence patient/client has to be referred 
to CHC/District Hospital where Hb electrophoresis/HPLC is possible 
NEWBORN SCREENING: 
The objective of newborn screening is to detect infants at risk of sickle cell disease within the neonatal 
period. This is intended to improve outcomes through early treatment and care. 
Newborn screening shall be conducted for sickle cell disease and trait at all public health institutions 
conducting institutional deliveries, in sickle cell endemic areas. The dried blood spot card is used for 
sickle screening and the routine Hb-HPLC equipment with the Hb variant program is used.
Informed consent: An explanatory leaflet detailing the purpose, process, and outcomes of newborn 
screening for sickle cell conditions must be provided to the parent(s) before screening. The purpose 
of screening should be explained before testing. In cases where the infant’s parent(s) does/do not 20
wish the child to be screened for sickle cell disease (or any of the other conditions), the decision to 
opt out of testing must be specifically documented. ICMR’S ethical guidelines for all subjects are to 
be invariably followed.
Newborn sampling: The dried blood spot card is used for sickle screening. For complete and proper 
processing of the specimen, four good-quality spots are required. Ideally, the sample should be 
dispatched to the newborn screening laboratory within 24 hours of collection. In normal circumstances, 
the delay should not affect analysis using the techniques described below
However, in occasional cases, if it has been kept in unsuitable conditions, excessive oxidation may 
occur rendering the sample unsatisfactory for analysis.
Dried Blood Spot sample card made from Whatman Filter paper No.3.
Usually, Guthrie cards are used for collecting DBS samples. They are essentially made of Whatman 
grade 3 paper (labeled as 901 in the catalogue) complete with a barcode and label for identification. 
DRIED BLOOD SPOT (DBS) Sample cards can also be prepared using Whatman filter paper no 3, as 
shown in the above photograph, and print 1cm circles on it along with the sample card number.
AFFECTED PERSON IDENTIFICATION: 
Each individual being screened shall be registered for an ABHA ID. Individuals with confirmed sickle 
cell disease diagnosis shall be registered at the respective HWC and linked with the ABHA ID with 
updated details on sickle cell disease or carrier status.21
DIAGNOSTICS AND DRUGS 
Under National Health Mission (NHM), in the Sickle Cell Disease prevalent areas, States shall ensure 
the availability of sickle cell disease testing at all SHC-HWC and PHC/UPHC-HWCs/U-HWCs. 
Clinical protocols for early diagnosis and intervention for sickle cell disease (SCD) shall be adopted. 
Teleconsultation services at AB-HWCs shall be leveraged especially in ‘sickle cell crises’ for prompt 
management.
States/UTs may choose to outsource, to appropriate private agencies, universal screening for sickle 
cell disease both in the community as well as in Ayushman Bharat Health and Wellness Centres(AB-
HWC) and higher healthcare centers. The states shall develop guidelines for outsourcing, with 
relevant selection criteria inclusive of licensing requirements of labs, and service components – like 
community mobilization, blood sampling, testing, sample transport, reporting, data entry, quality 
assurance, coverage, costs, etc.
Availability of basic drugs like Hydroxyurea, prophylactic penicillin, and vaccinations shall be 
ensured at public health facilities – AB-HWCs and referral centers. All these could be prescribed and 
administered at PHC/UPHC-HWC and at SHC-HWC, CHO shall dispense only under the guidance 
of PHC-MO.
At all first referral centers, daycare facilities for transfusion and monitoring shall be established.
NHM shall support all the needs listed above at the district and sub-district facilities.
Treatment facilities at the higher level of care, i.e. Tertiary level facilities to be financially supported 
through MoTA, and would be linked with Health care facilities below and utilizing the established 
linkages under NHM.22
HOLISTIC MANAGEMENT & CONTINUUM OF 
CARE
Without universal screening, SCD patient is generally diagnosed when she/he comes to the hospital 
with anemic symptoms, or sickle cell crisis. It is a common painful complication seen in patients of 
sickle cell disease. Acute episodes of severe pain (crises) are the primary reason that these patients 
seek medical care in hospital emergency departments.
Young children with SCD have an increased susceptibility to bacteremia due to Streptococcus 
pneumonia, which can be fatal in many cases. Acute splenic sequestration crisis is another cause 
of mortality in infancy. Hence, early diagnosis and providing care are critical in SCD, as lethal 
complications can occur even in the first few years of life in pre-symptomatic children.
MANAGEMENT OF SICKLE CELL DISEASE
Once the individual is confirmed positive for sickle cell disease ,the treatment shall be initiated at 
the PHC-HWC/UPHC-HWC level and at SHC-HWC level in consultation with medical officer. The 
goal for management should be patient centric focusing on life course approach with appropriate 
counseling of patient, educating regarding possible complications, pre-marital and pre-conception 
counselling.
General principals of management
• To improve quality of life and life expectancy of the affected individuals.
• Prevent and reduce the number of crises and complications
• Treat crises and complications promptly and effectively
• Promote a healthy lifestyle.
a) Prophylactic management: Folic acid and penicillin treatment shall be considered for 
prophylactic management. Folic acid helps to prevent deficiency resulting from increased cell 
turnover. Recommended dose of folic acid is 5mg daily to all SCD patients above one year of age. 
For below one year of age recommended dose is 2.5 mg daily. 
 SCD patients develop functional hyposplenia therefore oral Penicillin is recommended for 
children upto 5 years of age or lifelong for those who had splenectomy. The dosage of penicillin 
is as follows:
• Oral Penicillin V potassium 62.5mg/bd for 1 year
• 125mg/day after 1 year until the age of 2 years
• 250mg/day till 5 years
 SCD patients are at risk of severe infections due to hyposplenia especially infections due to 
encapsulated bacteria therefore, early vaccination shall be instituted to prevent  infection and 
complications in later stages of life. For newborn children, vaccination as per schedule in the 
National  Immunization schedule. For adults vaccination, national guidelines needs to be 
followed 23
b) Preventive Management: To avoid crisis, nutrition, health maintenance, and comprehensive 
care is important. Education of both patients and caregivers about sickle cell disease including 
‘Do’s and Dont’s in acute conditions before coming to the hospital, shall be undertaken.
c) Treatment for severe symptoms: Hydroxyurea should be considered for patients experiencing 
repeated episodes of acute chest syndrome or with more than three crises per year requiring 
hospitalization. Hydroxyurea has been proven to decrease complications in children, such as - 
pain crisis, acute chest syndrome and strokes.
 Hydroxyurea can be initiated by PHC MO at PHC-HWCs and the starting dose of Hydroxyurea 
is 10-15 mg/kg/ day in a single daily dose. Once started on hydroxyurea, the MO should follow 
up patient with the complete blood count (CBC) every 2 weeks; serum biochemistries every 2-4 
weeks. (Details of Hydroxyurea treatment in Annexure 4 )
 Children under the age of two should be referred to a higher centers for pediatric consultation.
Starting dose of Hydroxyurea = 10-15 mg/kg/day in a single daily dose
(to be started after 2 years of age)
Follow up with the CBC every 2 weeks
Monitor serum biochemistries every 2-4 weeks
If no major toxicity, escalate dose every 6-8 weeks until the desired
endpoint is reached
MANAGEMENT OF COMPLICATIONS
a) Management of acute chest syndrome (ACS):
 It is a medical emergency which requires management in the intensive care unit. Hydration 
should be monitored carefully to avoid the development of pulmonary edema, and oxygen 
therapy should be vigorous. Blood transfusion to decrease the proportion of sickle red cells may 
be needed. Intravenous antibiotics may have to be administered in severely ill ACS. Pain control 
and incentive spirometry can prevent lung collapse
b) Strokes and transient ischemic attacks (TIAs):
 Though rare in the Indian phenotype, children who develop these complications will benefit 
from hydroxyurea. These patients may benefit from blood transfusions to decrease HbS levels, 
and post stroke may need anticoagulation, along with required monitoring for anticoagulation 
medicines. Though unusual, this is a serious condition and such patients should be referred 
to a higher center to receive evaluation and required management. Patients who have suffered 
strokes, TIAs etc. will need Transcranial Doppler (TCD), computerized axial tomography, MRI, 24
or MRI with angiography. Comprehensive management of SCD requires a multi-specialty team, 
especially for young children with these complications.
c) Transfusion:
 This is needed only in special indications. Not all patients will require blood transfusion. In 
children receiving regular transfusions monitoring of serum ferritin and chelation therapy may 
be needed.
MANAGEMENT OF SCD IN PREGNANCY
Pregnancy poses additional risks of complication for both pregnant mother suffering from SCD and 
the fetus. All pregnancies need be managed as high-risk pregnancy
Complete health check-up, treatment of any anaemia and medications prior to conception is ideal. 
Folic acid is recommended daily before, and during pregnancy. Vitamin D should be prescribed as a 
supplementation during pregnancy.
Risks during pregnancy
• infection, thromboembolic events
• increase in spontaneous miscarriage
• increased risk of pre-eclampsia and pregnancy-induced hypertension
• premature labor and acute painful crises during pregnancy
• fetal growth restriction
• antepartum hemorrhage
• maternal mortality
• increased incidence of perinatal mortality
Females who are planning a child should 
• Stop hydroxyurea (HU) 3 months prior to planned conception 
• Avoid iron chelation medicines as these are potentially teratogenic. These drugs should be 
stopped before conception. If there is evidence of iron overload, that should be treated while the 
couple is planning for conception. Since sickle cell disease may also have iron deficiency, that 
should be treated as per guidelines for other pregnant women. 
FOLLOW UP
MO/CHO at all the primary health facilities will undertake regular checkup of all confirmed patients, 
every 3-6 months. The services include:
• Monitoring for fever, jaundice, pallor and spleen size on each health visit
• Monitoring Hb levels
• Refill of medications
• Counselling on Diet, stress management and risk reduction25
• At all PHC-HWCs, vaccination and penicillin prophylaxis therapy for all new-born identified 
with SCD
• Co-morbidity management
• In case of any complications, teleconsultations, or referral to the specialists
• Pain relief medications like NSAIDs, acetaminophen, along with syndromic management at 
SHC-HWCs and PHC/UPHC-HWCs for immediate relief
• In the event of pain crisis, Hydroxyurea shall be initiated by PHC MO at PHC-HWCs. PHC- 
MO shall continue to monitor and conduct teleconsultation with the specialist for termination of 
hydroxyurea treatment based on clinical endpoint criteria
• Regular home visits and supportive counselling services shall be provided by ASHAs and MPWs 
during treatment and to ensure treatment adherence. SCD patient register shall be maintained 
to ensure the regular follow-up. Educational material should be given to the caregiver and older 
children, so they understand about the disease, and especially about fever. Sickle cell carriers, 
usually have mild disease, but may need follow up for regular health maintenance, some will 
need intervention for fever, pain etc.
• Genetic counseling should be made available to all carriers as well as those with SCD
TELE MEDICINE FACILITY 
At AB-HWCs, roll-out of telemedicine services through e-Sanjeevani-HWC will be strengthened. 
Specialists at e-Sanjeevani-HWC Telemedicine hubs shall be trained on all aspects of SCD. Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs in collaboration with ICMR/AIIMS or similar reputed institutes would open a Helpline 
and also facilitate Tele Medicine facility at centre of excellences for sickle cell disease. Public awareness 
regarding both variants of e-Sanjeevani application viz., e-Sanjeevani HWC and e-Sanjeevani OPD 
shall be undertaken.
SECONDARY CARE
District hospitals would render specialist care for patients with sickle cell disease. The centres would 
also ensure downward referral to Ayushman Bharat - Health and Wellness Centres for follow up care. 
The care of sickle cell disease shall be included in the National Health Authority’s Ayushman Bharat 
PMJAY benefit package also.  
TERTIARY CARE
In each of the sickle cell anemia endemic States, Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA) along with AIIMS, 
New Delhi in that state, 2 other Centres may be identified and upgraded as centres of excellence. 
The chorionic villous sampling testing would be provided in selected tertiary care centres. MoTA 
shall extend support to these States for Infrastructure and HR at these centres. The private facilities, 
wherever available can also be empaneled for CVS testing till the facilities at COEs are developed. 
Selected Centres of Excellence (CoE) shall be in such a way that they can provide bone marrow 
transplant services also for eligible individuals with SCD 
INTEGRATION OF AYUSH IN SICKLE CELL DISEASE CARE
Yoga is an integral component of comprehensive primary healthcare provided through Ayushman 
Bharat Health and Wellness Centres (AB-HWC). Ministry of AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family 26
Welfare, Ministry of Tribal Affairs in coordination shall support epigenetic and clinical research on 
the role of Yoga in the prevention and cure of sickle cell disease complications.
An action research project has been sanctioned by MoTA to understand the efficacy of Yoga based life- 
style intervention (YBLI) in reducing oxidative stress and its related complications at different organ 
and systems level for the management of sickle cell anemia. This pilot project is being implemented 
by Swami Vivekananda Yoga Anusandhana Samsthana, S-VYASA University, Bengaluru and 
INFOMED, Ahmedabad. The interim findings have shown promising results in controlling painful 
crisis.
Based on the final outcomes of the project, the integration of Yoga in SCD prevention through AB-
HWCs and secondary care centres shall be undertaken. Arrangements for Yoga therapists for this 
initiative may be made through National AYUSH Mission. MoTA shall also financially support 
Ministry of AYUSH in research on therapeutic drugs
PATIENT SUPPORT SYSTEM 
Sickle cell disease may pose catastrophic economic consequences on both the individual with the 
disease and the family. For individuals with sickle cell anemia, support system for ensuring continuum 
of care and socioeconomic support shall focus on the following elements.
 yASHA shall maintain a line list of patients with SCD. ASHA & ANM/MPW and Community 
Volunteer wherever available, shall monitor treatment adherence. Wherever appropriate, a 
family member/care giver may also be assigned with the responsibility of observing treatment. 
The family member shall be trained and supported by ANM with support from CHO. To promote 
treatment adherence, appropriate technological solutions such as frequent calls, SMS reminders, 
IVRS, etc. may be deployed.
 yIndividuals confirmed positive for sickle cell disease shall be linked for disability certification 
and consequent socio-economic benefits.
 y Jan Arogya Samitis of SHC-HWC/UHWC and PHC-HWC/UPHC-HWC shall lead the community 
mobilization efforts reaching out to individuals and organizations. JAS shall facilitate the 
following:
a. IEC or BCC activities to increase the awareness in the community about sickle cell disease 
and mobilise community support
b. Social, financial and nutritional support for the affected families leveraged through adoption 
by corporates, industries, organisations & individuals.
c. linkage with skill development programmes and other relevant national programmes/
schemes of the government for economic livelihood.
d. Sustained availability of medicines and diagnostics for SCD at the health facilities.
COMMUNITY ADOPTION
Community adoption involves leveraging community support for people with sickle cell disease by 
identifying, orienting and motivating voluntary individuals and organizations. This initiative shall:27
1. Provide additional support for patients with sickle cell disease (SCD) to improve treatment 
outcomes
2. Enhance community support in the care of sickle cell disease
3. Leverage corporate social responsibility
EXPECTED OUTCOMES 
The expected outcomes of community adoption are as follows:
o Enhance awareness in the public and active involvement of society in the fight against Sickle Cell 
Disease
o Improved nutrition for the Sickle Cell Disease patients resulting in better treatment outcomes
o Reduction of out-of-pocket expenditure for the family
SCOPE OF SUPPORT:  
Identified donor can engage to support the consented individual or family of an individual or an 
entire geography (block/ward/ district) affected by SCD. 
Type of support: 
•	 For Individuals/Families: The type of additional assistance that may be provided by the donors to the 
consented SCD patients shall include the following:
o Nutritional support
o Counselling for lifestyle, treatment adherence and stress management
o All vaccine as per National Immunization Schedule
o Mobility support for follow up hospital visits including for penicillin and hydroxyurea 
prophylaxis
o Vocational support
•	 For blocks/ward/district: For Donors opting to support to adopt the entire geography affected by 
SCD, the support may be extended in the following: 
o IEC/BCC activities for community awareness
o Outreach screening camps for SCDs
o Counselling for lifestyle, treatment adherence and stress management
o Vaccine for all identified patients as per National Immunization Schedule 
o Vocational support
o Genetic Counselling support28
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN OF COMMUNITY ADOPTION:
Step 1: Development of integrated web portal and obtaining consent from SCD patients:
o Creation of ABHA ID based e-registry for individuals with SCDs
o Integration with centralized application for developing line listing of patients infected with SCDs
o Identification of patients through mass screening campaign and creating line list of all individuals 
with SCDs
o Mapping of individuals and families with SCDs through frontline workers.
o MO/CHO/MPW/ASHA shall approach the patients directly in person, listed from their area, and 
inform them about the support available under this intervention. The patient and family shall be 
also informed that their details shall be made available to the donor.
o Written consent will be obtained from the patient that the enrolment of the patient is his/her 
informed choice
o For patients who are newly registered in CPHC system, an OTP will be sent to the client’s mobile 
number and OTP will act as consent for the enrolment of beneficiaries
Step 2: Dissemination of plan:
o Use of mass media tools, SMS, digital banners, posters, leaflets, AV testimonials, social media 
assets, job aids etc.
o Inter-ministerial collaboration to increase public awareness regarding the program.
o Engagement with the mass media at the national and state level.
o Newspaper and TV/radio jingle-based announcements.
Step 3: Donor identification:
o Web portal will be developed for self-registration of donors. The page will have provisions to 
enter the details of the donor, state/UT wise list of districts, blocks, and cities, and the number of 
existing SCD patients in the block/city. The donor can choose one or more blocks/ urban wards 
and the intended duration for providing support. They can also enter the type of assistance that 
they would like to provide for the patients in the area.
o Information about the portal shall be widely disseminated through the use of mass media 
channels.
o District Health Society (DHS) under the chairmanship of district collector will engage with 
potential donors across corporates, public sector undertakings, institutions, citizens, elected 
representatives, etc. DHS Chair shall approve such donations to be finally implemented for the 
benefit of people with SCD. 29
Step 4: Service delivery:
o The assistance shall be provided by the identified donor to the patient, as mutually agreed with 
the district committee on SCD
o The donor and the district committee on SCD shall utilize existing systems or develop new 
systems to deliver assistance
o The donor should ensure the quality of in-kind assistance provided to the SCD patients
REHABILITATIVE CARE: 
The individuals with SCD are to be made aware of the following:
 States have extended support to individuals and children suffering from SCD
  That they can apply for Disability cards as individuals with SCD are now recognized under 
Rights of Persons with Disability Act 2016
  Facilities under Rights for Persons with Disability Act,2016 and amendments
  As Sickle Cell Disease is one of 21 benchmark disabilities under RPWD, any individual with SCD 
will be eligible for the following:
• Free education from 6 to 18 years of age
• 4% reservation in the education and government jobs
• 5% reservation in higher education
• Other rights under RPWD Act 201630
NATIONAL SICKLE CELL ANAEMIA 
ELIMINATION PORTAL 
Under National sickle cell Anaemia Elimination programme, National Informatics Center  has 
developed following software: 
•  Web Application/portal 
•  Common API to migrate state existing data 
•  Mobile Application Administrative Information
WEB PORTAL
The objective of ‘Sickle Cell’ 
web application is to facilitate a 
dashboard, creation of various 
level of users, beneficiary data 
edit and download various 
MIS reports. In home page the 
citizens can download their own 
sickle certificate, check the guest 
dashboard and also get various information related to sickle cell.
The portal has following features
1. Before using the web app, the user must get her/his government email id registered through 
concerned District User / State User / State Admin. User will be able to login only if her/his 
government email id is registered.
2. Citizens can get various information related to mission and sickle cell disease from the home 
page. It consists of various menu like about us, media gallery, contact us, user manual, Know 
your reports.
3. Citizen can download their sickle certificate from Know Your Report menu. They have to provide 
their registered mobile no that they have provided during registration. OTP will be sent to same 
registered mobile no and after successful verification they can get their sickle certificate.
4. User can get the cumulative and daily count of total registered, screened, negative, diseased and 
carrier national wide.
5. State and District user can edit the details entered from mobile application in case of any 
mismatch/mis typing done during the registration. For that they have to click on Patient edit List 
and click on edit button present against each record.
6. User can get the details of the patient whose screening test is done and he/she is found to be 
positive but confirmation test is not conducted yet. They can also download it in PDF and CSV 
format
31
SICKLE CELL MOBILE APPLICATION
The data of every person would be captured through a Mobile Application developed by National 
Information Center  after due generation of ABHA (unique Health ID) of every person being screened 
or provided healthcare. The same would be stored in a Central Repository/database linked to a 
MoHFW portal and Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission.
The application has following features:
• beneficiary registration
• test details (solubility, HPLC/Electrophoresis or Point of 
Care) captured in both online and offline mode
• integration with ABHA ID
The application contains following details: 
• Registration: To record the screened person’s details. 
• Screening Test Details: To record the results of solubility or 
POC test. 
• HPLC/Electrophoresis Test Details: To record the HPLC/
Electrophoresis test details. 
• Syncing: To Sync offline (local database) data with the 
server’s data
The indicators pertaining to sickle cell disease intervention at 
SHC-HWC/UHWC and PHC-HWC/UPHC-HWC are updated 
in the  Sickle cell Mobile application developed by National 
Informatics center on a daily basis. These indicators shall be used 
for reviewing the status of implementation of the sickle disease 
prevention and care at all levels of care.
For more details on web portal and mobile application visit the link below
https://sickle.nhm.gov.in/home
32
OPERATIONAL FRAMEWORK
HUMAN RESOURCES:
States are encouraged to make use of existing human resources effectively for SCD prevention and 
elimination. However, there is an additional provision of having one counsellor for two PHC/UPHC- 
HWCs for the purpose of counselling and facilitating the services. States have liberty to modify the 
role as per local context.
CAPACITY BUILDING
Module Development 
A team of experts on SCD constituted by MoHFW has developed detailed  training modules for 
primary healthcare personnel at Ayushman Bharat Health and Wellness Center (AB-HWC) covering 
all aspects related to SCD from prevention and early diagnosis to holistic management. The  target 
personnel includes medical officers, community health officers, staff nurse, MPW/ASHA.
The training module  for Medical officers delves on leading the primary health team for prevention 
and comprehensive care of sickle cell disease including awareness generation, screening and 
counselling, early diagnosis, treatment initiation and continuum of care.
The training module for Community Health officers focusses on sickle cell prevention and care 
leadership at SHC-HWC level. This includes awareness generation, screening and counselling, 
referral for early diagnosis, treatment and maintaining continuum of care.
The training module  for Staff Nurses delves supporting the medical officer in awareness generation, 
screening, early diagnosis, treatment initiation and continuum of care.
The training module for MPW/ASHA focusses on awareness generation, referral and follow up 
support.
The copies of such training material will be provided to all States and will also be made available 
digitally on Sickle Cell support corner, Sickle Cell Portal developed by MoHFW, websites of MoHFW 
and NHSRC.
Training of Medical, Paramedical Staff
Training of all healthcare professionals is crucial to treat SCD patients effectively leading to better 
health outcomes to patients. The three Centres of Excellence (one AIIMS and 2 other select medical 
colleges) established with MOTA support in each selected state, along with MoHFW and State Tribal 
Department functionaries shall build the capacity of the human resources at various levels of the State 
Departments of Health and Family Welfare, and Tribal Development for tackling SCD. Awareness 
and training programme for Ekalvya Model Residential School teachers and school students will be 
conducted by MoHFW, TRIs and NTRI. The medical and paramedical staff will be trained in a time 
bound manner so that there are trained staffs available in each district of the states.33
MONITORING
The Sickle cell Portal wherein through Dashboard the necessary monitoring of the Mission progress 
shall be undertaken. The Monitoring and evaluation tools shall be provided at National level, State 
level and District level so that necessary and constant steering can happen.
The performance assessment and grading of the better performing states and districts shall also be 
done by prescribing the indicators in consultation with NITI Aayog.
States may use the following suggested set of indicators to monitor:
Parameters
Total number screened for Sickle Cell Disease
Number diagnosed with Sickle cell trait
Number diagnosed with Sickle Cell Disease
Number of persons with Disease registered at the facility
Number of patients receiving Inj. Penicillin for the prophylaxis of infection
Number of patients taking treatment(hydroxyurea)
Number of persons with Disease under community adoption scheme
KEY ACTIVITIES AT VARIOUS LEVELS 
Sickle Cell Disease Programme Sub-Committee at State, District and Block Lev el 
Programme sub-committee for Sickle Cell Mission shall be constituted at State, District and Block in 
each implementing state. The State level programme sub-committee shall be sub-committee of the 
State Health Society. It shall drive policy, technical support and overall monitoring of Sickle Cell 
Disease program in the state. It will be chaired by the State Mission Director, National Health Mission 
and co-chaired by the Head of the State Department of Tribal Affairs.
The sub-committee shall include representatives from Department of Primary and Secondary 
Education, Department of Social Welfare, Department of Women and Child Development, 
representatives from two Academic institutions preferably from the Centers of Excellence and 
representatives from three NGOs/ Civil society organizations working in Tribal Health and/or Sickle 
Cell Anemia. The subcommittees shall review the programme regularly and share a monthly report 
of programme performance to the State Health Society.
Similar sub-committees at the District and Block level shall be created with District Collector as Chair 
and Tahsildar/Block Development Officer/Block Panchayat Executive Officer/Municipal corporation/ 
ULBs as Chair respectively. Representatives corresponding to the member Departments in state sub- 
committee shall be members at District and Block level sub-committees of the Sickle Cell Mission. 
As in State sub-committee, two representatives from Academic institutions and representatives from                            
3. NGOs/ Civil society organizations working in Tribal Health and/or Sickle Cell Anemia in the District 
shall be part of the District level sub- committee. The Block level sub-committee may or may not have 
a representative from the academic institutions. However, representatives from 3 NGOs/ Civil society 
organizations working in Tribal Health and/or Sickle Cell Anemia in the block shall be included. The 
Member of Parliament shall be a special invitee in the district subcommittee. The District and Block 
level sub-committees will be involved in operational planning, implementation, and field monitoring 34
of the Sickle Cell Mission. The District and Block level sub-committees too shall regularly review 
the Sickle Cell Mission program implementation and performance and submit report to the district 
health society.
The District Health Society shall at least once a quarter, hold a special review of the Sickle Cell Mission.
At the Ayushman Bharat - Health and Wellness Centres 
The Jan Arogya Samitis (JAS) shall plan, organize and monitor the facility-based screening camps in 
both urban and rural areas. The block level officials of the tribal department and women and child 
development department shall be invited members for all planning, coordination, and monitoring 
of the screening camps. All data pertaining to the screening, patients identified and on treatment, 
persons lost for follow up shall be part of the monthly reporting of the AB-HWCs on the AB-HWC 
portal.
At the Village/Slum Level 
The ANMs, ASHAs and MAS would use the platform of Village/Urban Health, Sanitation and 
Nutrition Committees to build awareness and to organise outreach screening camps. The tribal 
chieftains, tribal representative, the Ashram school teachers and wardens of the tribal hostel shall be 
mandatorily invited if they are not members of the VHNSC.
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF STAKEHOLDERS
Sickle cell disease care requires a multi-stakeholder approach. In order to ensure optimal care and 
improved outcomes for patient with SCD, each stakeholder type will need to embrace a unique set of 
roles and responsibilities. While the district Hospitals are equipped with necessary diagnostics and 
management facilities, the Tertiary care Hospitals including AIIMS and other should have facilities 
for prenatal diagnosis and BMT facilities.
The various recommendations have been outlined in previous sections. The list is indicative and not 
exhaustive.
Role of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
• Under NHM, necessary support will be extended to states for prevention and management of 
sickle cell at public healthcare facilities including screening.
• Develop SOPs and clinical guidelines for SCD care and management
• Develop M&E framework for effective program monitoring, implementation and management
• Integrate care of SCD in the PMJAY care package
• Registry maintenance through SCD portal
• Support states in roll-out of telemedicine services in all the endemic areas of SCDs.
Role of AIIMS, Centres of Excellence and all Medical Colleges  
• Provide chorionic villous sampling (CVS) and other advanced diagnostics
• Provide care for all referred patients35
• Being a telemedicine hub support primary and secondary health care institutions in clinical 
management of patients with severe Sickle cell disease
 • Undertake capacity building of healthcare providers on SCD
• Undertake public health and clinical research related to sickle cell disease
• Act as a technical guide to states on clinical management of sickle cell anemia
• Neonatologist, Gynecologist to play key role along with Haematologist
List of AIIMS, centers of excellence and all medical colleges is given in Annexure 1
Role of ICMR , Dept. of Bio Technology and other Research Institutions:
• Include sickle cell disease as a priority area of research. Research may include the studies of 
etiology, genetic/epigenetic studies for prevention effectiveness, care models etc.
• Undertake clinical trials and studies to promote newer therapies and drugs for SCD treatment
• Department of Bio-Technology to act as scientific partner
Role of Ministry of Tribal Affairs:
• Lead IEC, BCC and social media campaigns for prevention, care and control of SCD
• Support universal screening, early identification
• Formalize role of Eklavya Model Residential Schools in awareness generation, students screening 
for SCD
• Facilitate NGOs and CBOs supported by ministry to engage in awareness generation and 
universal screening in their areas of operation
• Support establishment of Centres of Excellence in each state for chorionic villous Sampling
• Fund CSIR & Ministry of AYUSH for research in SCD management
Role of States and Health Department 
• Constitute Sickle Cell Programme Sub-Committee at the state, district and block levels
• Sensitize and engage rural and urban local bodies, panchayats, municipal corporations, ULBs 
etc.
• Prepare plan for universal screening
• Identify and support centers of excellence in the states
• Allocate financial resources from NHM PIP and leverage MoTA grants
• District Health Society to monitor the performance of the program on a monthly basis36
Role of NGOS :
• Support states and districts in awareness generation and community mobilization, capacity 
development of health care providers and facilitators offering counselling services, ensuring 
treatment adherence and follow up of sickle cell disease
• Pilot innovations for strengthening early detection and diagnosis of SCDs at state, district and 
community levels for evidence-based SCD management
Indian Red Cross Society
• Support States and districts in providing blood transfusion services for the critical patients 
diagnosed with SCDs
• Leverage their thalassemia screening and counselling centres for providing services related to 
SCDs
• Include SCD awareness as one of the agenda in their youth -led community-based interventions
Role of Other Ministries 
Ministry of Education
• Participate in state/district and block level committees
• Create awareness regarding sickle cell disease among school-going children and during parent - 
teacher meetings
• Ensure support of school health ambassadors in organizing camps for screening of school going 
children
Ministry of Women and Child Development
• Enable screening of children in anganwadi by RBSK teams either camp based or in schools in 
tribal areas / ICDS centres
• Participate in state/district and block-level sub-committee
• Create awareness regarding screening diagnosis and management of SCDs through the 
Anganwadis and SHGs
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment
• Participate in state/district and block level sub-committee
• Create awareness regarding screening diagnosis and management of SCDs
• Ensure disability certification and benefits of other relevant socio-economic schemes for persons 
affected by sickle cell disease37
ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF HEALTH PERSONNEL
Sl 
NoHuman 
resourceRoles and responsibilities
1. Urban 
community 
platforms/
JAS/VHSNC•	Identification of the total target household and mobilize the vulnerable 
population with the help ASHAs to the screening camp/facility
•	Support to ASHA in arranging the screening camps
•	Community awareness through household visits
•	Discuss with the ASHA and make a weekly/monthly plan to address their 
specific health needs and burdens.
•	Follow up with the ASHAs and visit the identified vulnerable households/ 
individuals/groups again on intermittent rounds to monitor the delivery 
of care.
2. ASHA •	Identification and mobilization of the eligible population for screening 
camps/ facility level screening
•	Community awareness through household visits, VHSND, MAS, JAS, 
camps, etc.
•	Pre-marital and preconception counselling
•	Motivate ANC and partner for screening
•	Establishment of patient support groups
•	Follow-up care of the confirmed cases
3.MPW (M/F) •	Provide group and individual counselling on sickle cell anemia prevention 
and control
•	Support CHO in conducting outreach and facility-based screening camps 
for Sickle cell disease
•	Support CHO in recording and reporting the screening activities
•	Support CHO in assuring the availability of logistics, diagnostics and 
consumables as required for the camps
4.Staff Nurse •	Provide group and individual counselling to the people on sickle cell 
anemia prevention and control
•	Assure availability of logistics, diagnostics and consumables as required 
for the camps for the PHC
5.Laboratory 
Technician •	Conduct sickle cell screenings
•	Assure availability of diagnostics and consumables as required for the 
camps for the PHC
•	Participate in both facility-based and community-based screening for 
SCD38
Sl 
NoHuman 
resourceRoles and responsibilities
6. Counsellor •	Provide group and individual counselling to the people on sickle cell 
anaemia prevention and control
•	Support MO in organizing screening camps
•	Maintain line list of diagnosed individuals in the catchment area for 
counselling support
•	Under monthly   capacity   building   sessions   for   CHOs/ASHAs/MPW   
on counselling care of individuals diagnosed with SCDs
•	Pre and post-test counselling to all referred patients or OPD patients for 
SCDs
•	Support PHC team during screening camps
•	To provide information about community adoption options available for 
affected families and undertake informed consent of patients
•	Provide information about pregnancy continuation in case of carrier 
parents and motivate partner screening
7.Community 
Health 
Officer•	Plan and organize screening camps bi-weekly
•	Assuring the availability of logistics, diagnostics, and consumables as 
required for the camps
•	Screen persons for sickle cell disease 
•	Pre and post-test counselling
•	Record and report the activities
•	Refer identified cases to higher centres for diagnosis and treatment 
initiation
•	Follow-up of confirmed cases at the facility and the household through 
ASHAs
8. Medical 
Officer•	Plan and organize screening camps bi-weekly
•	Support catchment area SHC in conducting screening camps
•	Ensure availability of logistics, diagnostics and consumables as required 
for the camps for the PHC as well as catchment SHC
•	Screen persons for sickle cell disease 
•	Pre and post-test counselling
•	Treatment initiation
•	Referral of the identified cases to higher centres for diagnosis and 
treatment initiation
•	Follow-up of confirmed cases39
SERVICE DELIVERY FRAMEWORK
Community levelAB-HWCs/ primary
healthcare facilitiesSecondary healthcare
facilitiesTertiary care facilities &
CoEs
Awareness generation 
and mobilization
•	Community 
awareness by 
ASHA and MPW, 
through home visits, 
VHSNC/MAS, and 
JAS
•	Sensitization 
through self-help 
groups and youth 
clubs
•	IEC and BCC 
activities through 
TV, radio, 
newspaper, etc
•	Involvement of 
community influence 
ers, like tribal head, 
teachers, sarpanch, 
etc in creating 
awareness
•	Pre-marital and pre- 
conception counsel- 
ling by ASHA/MPW
•	Follow-up 
of diagnosed 
individuals and 
patients on treatment
•	Establishment of 
patient support 
groups
Screening camps
•	Sickle cell disease 
screening of 
adolescents in 
schools and Hostels
•	Screening of remote 
and inaccessible 
tribal hamlets 
through Mobile 
Medical Units
•	Counselling and 
social support
•	Referral of screened 
patients with 
solubility test 
positive
•	Working with JAS 
for registration of 
patients for the 
community adoption 
schemeAt SHC-HWC level
•	Registration of all 
individuals and pro-
vision of ABHA ID
•	Screening at all AB-
HWCs in select districts 
both on outpatient basis 
and on scheduled facil- 
ity-based screening 
camps
•	Screening of referred 
cases from the out- reach 
camps
•	Opportunistic outpatient-
based screening of 
individuals at AB-HWCs
•	Couple counselling
•	Referral of screened 
reactive cases for 
confirmation of diagnosis 
and treatment initiation 
at higher centers
•	Hydroxyurea follow up 
medication refill
•	E-registry
•	Blood grouping and 
matching for individuals 
confirmed to be having 
sickle cell disease/trait
•	Teleconsultation services 
to higher centers
At PHC-HWC level
•	Screening and 
confirmatory test
•	Teleconsultation services 
to higher centres
•	Tele-counselling 
for nutrition, stress 
management and 
treatment adherence
•	Prophylactic penicillin 
and vaccinations for 
newborns
•	Holistic management 
of crisis and other 
complications 
•	Initiation of hydroxyurea 
based on need and follow 
up medication refill 
•	Mapping and Facilitation 
of patients for community 
adoption•	Confirmation 
of sickle cell 
diagnosis 
using HPLC/
electro- phoresis 
of individ uals 
referred from 
PHC/SHC/
Community
•	Screening of 
all sus- pected 
individuals
•	specialist care 
for patients with 
sickle cell disease
•	Downward 
referral
•	Transfusion 
services as 
required
•	Inclusion of SCD 
services under 
PMJAY package•	Prenatal screening 
(chorionic villous 
sampling testing) in 
select tertiary care 
centers
•	Select COE shall  
pro- vide bone 
marrow transplant 
service for eligible in-
dividuals with SCD
Capacity building 
by CoEs:
•	capacity of the HR at 
various levels of the 
State Departments of 
HFW & Tribal  
Development for 
tackling SCD.
•	Awareness and 
training programme 
for Eklavya Model 
Residential School 
teachers and school 
students with guid-
ance from MoHFW, 
TRIs and NTRI40
FINANCIAL NORMS OF THE PROJECT
Sl 
noItem Unit PriceYear 1
(2022-23)
(in lakhs)Year 2
(2023-24)
(in lakhs)Year 3
(2024-25)
(in lakhs)
1Point of care Test OR Solubility 
tests + HPLC/ electrophoresis TestUpto Rs. 100 150 350 200
2Hydroxyurea for SCDs (@ 1% of 
the total Screened Persons)Rs 1000/year/
patient1.5 3.5 2
3 PCV VaccinationAs and when part of UIP / after due NTAGI 
recommendations
4 Human resource- counsellor Rs. 319 Cr Per annum (For 1 counsellor each in 2 PHCs)41
ADVANCED RESEARCH
The Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) IGIB is working on CRISPR CAS-9 therapy 
on cells or Sickle Cell Disease. The breakthrough success of CRISPR-CAS (Clustered Regularly 
Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats- CRISPR Associated) methods for correcting genetic diseases 
in patients has fuelled significant scientific investment into bringing such methods to the clinic. This 
technology (which won the Noble Prize in Chemistry in 2020) has the potential to be a single dose 
cure for blood disorders like Sickle Cell Anemia.
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS) an autonomous body of the Ministry 
of AYUSH has developed two coded formulations, AYUSH-RP and AYUSH-SC3 for managing SCD 
through systemic drug development process.
The acute, subacute (28 days) and sub-chronic (90 days) toxicity studies on AYUSH-RP have been 
conducted by the CCRAS. An exploratory clinical study on AYUSH-RP has highlighted that there 
were fewer episodes of SCD related pain crises, no need of blood transfusion during the study period, 
and no iron overload with the medication. Ayurveda intervention was also found to be safe and well- 
tolerated. Based on these outcomes, CCRAS shall undertake randomized controlled study titled “A 
Randomized controlled open label clinical study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of an Ayurvedic 
intervention as add on for prevention of crises in sickle cell anemia”
The research studies will be undertaken by the CCRAS independently and as well as in collaboration 
with ICMR. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs shall provide funds through its schemes of Centre of 
Excellence, TRI scheme, Grants under SGATOTSP/Article 275(1) of Constitution and will also facilitate 
funding through STC funds available with Department of Science and Technology.
SUMMARY & CONCLUSION
These guidelines provide a blueprint for action by highlighting key domains and strategic 
recommendations to improve SCD care and where each stakeholder can identify and implement 
specific strategic recommendations. While the challenge to provide advance care for patients with 
SCD seems daunting, it is indeed achievable, especially with engaged active partners leading the 
way. A multi-stakeholder approach is needed to mitigate the barriers and ensure improvement in the 
quality of care for individuals with SCD and for preventive and promotive efforts.42
ANNEXURES 
ANNEXURE 1 :
STATE-WISE INSTITUTIONS TO BE CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE 
(INDICATIVE LIST) 
S.No State Institutes
1. Andhra PradeshGIMSR Medical College, Visakhapatnam
GSL Medical College & General Hospital, Rajamahendravaram
Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, Srikakulam
2 TelanganaNizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences- Hyderabad
Vijaywada Medical college
AIIMS Bibinagar
3 MaharashtraKEM hospital
Nagpur Medical College 
Special Centre for Hemoglobinopathies-Chandrapur ICMR-NIIH
4 GujaratIndian Medical & Scientific Research Foundation, Rajkot, Gujarat
Surat Medical College
Ahmedabad medical college
5 RajasthanSMS Medical College, Jaipur
RNT Medical College Udaipur
AIIMS Jodhpur
6Madhya PradeshNSCB Medical College, Jabalpur
Govt. Medical College, Indore
AIIMS Bhopal
7ChhattisgarhGovt. Medical College & Hospital, Jagdalpur
Sickle cell Institute
AIIMS Raipur
8 Tamil NaduMedical College, Salem
Govt Medical College, Coimbatore
AIIMS, Madurai
9OdishaVeer Surendra Sai Institute of Medical Sciences, Burla
Govt. Medical College, Cuttack
Paripada Medical college43
S.No State Institutes
10 West BengalInstitute of Haematology & Transfusion Medicine, NRS Medical 
College, Kolkata
Medical college Kolkatta
Department of Human Genetics, Institute of Genetics & Genomic 
Science, Kolkata
11Uttar Pradesh RML medical college KGMU medical college , BHU medical college
12 Jharkhand RIMS Ranchi 
13 Bihar PMCH-Patna
Indira institute of medical sciences
14KarnatakaVictoria Institution of Medical Science
KR hospital and medical Mysore
Chamraj nagar super speciality hospital
15KeralaCalicut Medical College
Government Medical College Ernakulam
Government Medical College, Palakkad
16UttarakhandGovt. Medical college Uttarakhand
Government Medical College Haridwar
Government Doon Medical College
17 Assam Guwahati Medical College, Guwahati
Assam Medical College, Dibrugarh
Silchar Medical College, Silchar44
ANNEXURE 2:
 SICKLE CELL DISEASE MANGEMENT
Universal Screening for Population  
(≤40years)  
 
Community/  
Facility  
based  Screening in few tribal  
pockets/ blocks/villages of  
high endemicity using target  
group  approach  
Solubility/POC  
Based on  
availability  Community/  
Facility  
based  
Screen  
positive * Screen  
negative  
Premarital/pre - 
conceptional/genet  
ic counselling,  
Cascade screening  
of family  members  
**Other techniques like  
IEF/CZE can be used  
based on state specific  
initiatives/availability  Confirmatory testing** using GOI -approved  
Point of Care tests at AB-HWC level  or by  
HPLC/Hb electrophoresis at higher centers  
(if screening by solubility test or doubt for  
other  haemoglobinopathy  SC Trait (Carrier;  
AS) SC Diseased*  
(SS)  Target  group  screening  Mass  screening  ANNEXURE  2- SICKLE  CELL  DISEASE  MANGEMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Prevention  Treatment  and Management  for SCD  
1. Preventive strategies to the community along with focused counselling to the affected person and family  
is one of the key strategy  in reducing  the incidence  of SCD.  
2. Prophylactic  treatment  (all vaccination for infections/folic  acid etc.) 
3. Regular  treatment  with  Hydroxyurea  
4. Nutrition  intervention  and diet counselling  
5. Psychological  support  to adolescents  and adults  for life long  management  of disease  
6. Management  of complications  with  defined  upward  and down  ward  linkages  
7. Blood  support for transfusion  
 
 
 
Awareness generation  
Using local mass  
media/Public platforms  
like schools.  Public health  
facilities for education  
about the prevention  
strategies  Counselling and  
support  
Group counselling by  
forming  patient  support  
groups and information  
sharing   
Data management  
and monitoring  
Sickle cell disease  
electronic data base via  
SMART  application  States  with  high  prevalence  States  with  low prevalence 45
ANNEXURE 3 :
IEC STRATEGIES
It is the most important component for the prevention and control of Sickle Cell Disease. The aim 
of IEC strategy is creation of an informed society willing to participate voluntarily in screening 
programmes and take steps for preventing births of children affected with the disease and access care 
if affected with the disease.IEC strategies planned and developed should focus on following points:
 yInheritance pattern and genetic risk
 y Sensitize to requirement of routine follow up and monitoring
 yAttention to fever and grade of fever
 yImportance of adequate hydration, dangers of dehydration
 yVaccination
 y Recognition of pain
 yHome therapy for pain
 yNeed of chronic medications like hydroxyurea
 y When to seek medical help- danger signs, Splenic palpation, looking out for pallor, jaundice etc.
Implementation strategy 
Strategy Content 
Mass communication and 
mediamessages should aim to remove any stigma by promoting knowledge 
of genetics and inheritance by general and targeted campaigns and 
awareness about prevalence of disease and that it is preventable.
People should be made aware of specific initiatives of the government.
Mid media activities IEC material and campaigns developed by the States should also focus 
on promotion of voluntary blood donation to fulfil requirements 
of blood and to improve access to care services to all affected by 
promoting knowledge of the treatment modalities available through 
the public health facilities. 
The display of posters at all health facilities and identified community 
places should be ensured. 
Non-government organizations (NGO) and community-based 
organizations can be involved in development of resource materials. 
States should work with education department for inclusion of 
information about hemoglobinopathies in the school textbooks and 
school health programs.46
Strategy Content 
Inter-personal communication and one to group communication
These are very effective IEC tools with well trained counsellors and informed healthcare personnel. 
Some specific points of application are listed below:
Adolescent screening in 
schools:An organized IEC module to ensure communication and retention 
of information is vital for success of carrier screening programme for 
adolescents
• A pre-screening power point assisted 30-minute educational 
talk by Field IEC officer or School Health and wellness 
ambassadors
• Distribution of booklets on sickle cell and anemia urging the 
students to read and keep the booklet and organizing a quiz 
session based on booklet and talk. 
• One to one communication with those having positive 
screening test
• One to one counselling at the time of follow up visit at school 
or PHC/CHC for collection of samples for confirmatory 
testing of those with single positive diagnostic test.
At AWCs and AFHCs
At SC, PHC, CHC and DH
During Blood donation 
camps and at Blood centreOne to one counselling in at least two to three sessions and 
reinforcement of information by healthcare workers – ASHAs.
At DEICs Inform children who have sickle cell disease about care and prevention 
of complications and affected families about the importance of family 
(cascade) screening.47
ANNEXURE 4 :
 TREATMENT WITH HYDROXYUREA
Hydroxyurea (HU), is a ribonucleotide reductase inhibitor found effective in sickle cell disease patient. 
It has been shown to reduce hemolysis through improved erythrocyte hydration, and macrocytosis. 
HU augments Nitric oxide (NO) release leading to vasodilatation. Twenty percent patients with this 
disease will never need it and another 20 percent of the patients will not respond to it well. Hence 
each patient needs to be evaluated for possible hydroxyurea therapy.
 A trained Medical Officer will be able to oversee management of SCD requiring hydroxyurea and 
should follow up with each patient once a month or whenever there is any problem or for dose 
modification.
Target groups-
 yin children above 2 years of age, and in adolescents with SCD, offer treatment with hydroxyurea 
regardless of clinical severity to reduce complications (e.g., pain, dactylitis, ACS, anaemia) related 
to SCD. 
 yIn adults and children with SCD who have chronic kidney disease and are taking erythropoietin, 
hydroxyurea is added to improve anaemia. However lower doses are required in patients with 
CKD.
 y  In persons with HbS beta+ thalassemia disease who have recurrent SCD-associated pain that 
interferes with daily activities or quality of life, hydroxyurea therapy can be considered after 
consulting a specialist.
Following points to be considered while staring treatment with Hydroxyurea
Starting dose 10-15 mg/kg/day
The dose can be increased gradually till 35 mg/kg/day (Maximum 
Tolerance dose) depending upon the need
Follow-up The Patients initiated on hydroxyurea have to be monitored every 
4 weeks, for Complete Blood Count, differential WBC every time 
before the decision to adjust dosage is considered. The response 
to control of symptoms may take up to 3 to 6 months and should 
also be recorded
Non response to HU Therapy In persons with HbS–thalassemia disease who have recurrent 
SCD-associated pain that interferes with daily activities or quality 
of life, or not demonstrating a clinical response to appropriate 
doses and duration (one year) of hydroxyurea therapy, refers to 
district hospital for further investigation and management.
Counselling of patients for 
hydroxyurea therapyPatients should be reminded that the effectiveness of hydroxyurea 
depends on their adherence to daily dosing
Should be counselled not to double doses if a dose is missed 
Females of reproductive age should be counselled about the need 
for stopping 3 months prior to conceiving 
Clinical response to treatment may take 3 to 6 months48
ANNEXURE 5 :
LIST OF DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES (ACCORDING  
TO LEVEL OF FACILITY)
Diagnostic tests HWC-SHC & 
UHWCPHC CHC SDH DH
Solubility test E E E E E
GoI approved Point of Care Tests E E E E E
HPLC/ Electrophoresis D E E
Sickling test D E E E E
Peripheral Blood Film D E E E E
CBC E E E E
Platelet E E E E
Differential Leucocyte Count E E E E
reticulocyte count D E E E E
Renal Function tests D E E E E
Liver function tests D E E E E
Urinalysis (Dipstick) E E E E E
Serum ferritin D D E
PFT* E
Echocardiogram E E E E
MRI D
Haemoglobin E E E E E
Arterial blood gas test E E
2D-ECHO D
Electroencephalography (EEG) D
Urine test for pH, specific gravity, leuco-
cyte esterase, glucose, bilirubin, urobilino-
gen, ketone, protein, nitrite, Urine for 
microalbumin,D E E E E
Urine Microscopy E E E E
Urine for creatinine and Albumin to creati-
nine ratio (ACR)E E E 
Serum potassium E E E E
E: Essential; D: Desirable, *- DH above 100 beds49
 ANNEXURE 6 :
 LIST OF COMPLICATIONS AND ITS MANAGEMENT (ACCORDING TO 
LEVEL OF FACILITY) 
Acute complications
Chronic complications Vascular events- stroke, 
TIA, VTE Non- vascular
Vaso-occlusive crisis Infection Chronic pain
CVA Severe anemia Anemia 
Acute chest syndrome sequestration crises Lung disease and PAH
Renal infarcts Hemolytic crises Renal impairment and secondary hypertension
Bone pain Aplastic crisesOsteoporosis, avascular necroses (head of 
femur, humerus etc), bone infarcts and other 
complications
Myocardial infarction  Cardiac dysfunction and diastolic dysfunction
Priapism  Hepatobiliary dysfunction
Pregnancy related 
problems Chronic leg ulcers
  Proliferative retinopathy
  Neurologic deficit/ seizure 50
Chronic complications and management
Sr. 
NoComplication Intervention PHC CHC DH
1 Chronic pain
AVN, leg ulcer, no 
cause identifiedHydroxyurea Y Y Y
Drug treatment Paracetamol, 
Amitryptiline
NSAID±Amitryptiline
Gabapentinoid
Serotonin and 
norepinephrine 
reuptake 
inhibitors 
(SNRIs)
Tramadol
Opioid
NSAIDAmitryptiline
Gabapentinoid
SNRI
Tramadol
Opioid
NSAID
Physical therapy Simple joint 
mobilization
Yoga
Heat applicationY
OT/PTY
OT/PT
Psychotherapy/ CBT - - Y
2 Chronic anemia Investigate 
CBC+Retic+PBF
Serum Iron profile 
including ferritin,B12/
Folate,LFT/KFT
DCT/ICT,BG+Rh and 
Cross Match- Y Y
Extended RBC 
phenotype
(C/c/E/e/Kk/Fy/Jk)- - -
Hydroxyurea Y Y Y
Erythropoitein - - Y
Iron supplements Y Y Y
Folic acid Y Y Y
Blood transfusion - Y Y
Oral Iron Chelation 
Drugs - As per need in 
selected blocksY
Integrated services for
Hemoglobinopathies 
& Haemophilia- - (Desirable)51
Sr. 
NoComplication Intervention PHC CHC DH
3Lung disease
Pulmonary 
Hypertension
Pulmonary 
Thromboembolism
Asthma
Lung FibrosisHistory, Exam, SpO2 Y Y Y
Chest x-ray - Y Y
Spirometry - - Y
HRCT/CECT/CTPA - - Referral to 
higher centre2D-ECHO - -
Right Heart 
Catheterization- -
Polysomnography - -
d-dimer, BNP/NT-
proBNP- - D
Inhalers for asthma Y Y Y
Anticoagulation 
prophylaxis PTE 
recurrent/acute- - Y
Pulmonary specialist 
consultation for 
management of 
chronic hypoxia and 
PAH- - Referral to 
Higher centre
4Hypertension Antihypertensive 
(preferable ACE 
inhibitors and ARB) 
target BP 130/85 or lessY Y Y
5 Renal 
disease,Proteinuria
CKD,Hematuria , 
papillary necrosis
UTI,Loss 
of urinary 
concentration 
abilityInvestigation
Urine routine & 
Microscopy
Urine culture and 
sensitivity
KFT ,Imaging -USGY
Y
Y
-Y
Y
Y
YY
Y
Y
Y
Treat proteinuria* with 
ACE-I/ARBY Y Y
Treat HT Y Y Y
Nephrology specialist 
consultation- - D
Hemodialysis Y52
Sr. 
NoComplication Intervention PHC CHC DH
6Osteoporosis
Bone disease-AVN, 
osteomyelitis, bone 
necrosisDiagnosis X-ray - Y Y
Calcium+ vit D3 Y Y Y
Pain management Y Y Y
OT/PT - Y Y
MRI Desirable 
Orthopaedic 
assessment- - Y
Orthopaedic 
procedure- - Y/D
7 Cardiac 
dysfunction
LVH,MI,Heart 
failureInvestigations
ECG
2D-ECHO
Chest X- ray
Iron level with ferritin
NT-proBNP-
-
D
-
-Y
-
Y
D
-Y
Y
Y
Y
Referral to 
Higher centre 
for Echo and 
NT-proBNP
Treatment ACE-I/
ARB/beta blocker/ 
Furosemide/ nitrates/ 
statin/iron chelation as 
indicated 
(Refer to higher centre 
for iron chelation 
therapy)Y Y Y
Cardiology specialist 
consult- - Y/D
8Hepatobiliary 
dysfunction
Gall stones
(pigment)
CBD stones
Hepatitis-acute & 
chronic
Sequestration crisis
Sickle cell 
cholangiopathyInvestigations
LFT, PT, Iron,
Viral markers- HBV, 
HCV, HAV, HEV
USG abdomenLFT, 
Viral markersY Y
Gall stone disease 
surgery- - Refer to higher 
centre
Iron chelation y
Surgery consultation - Y Y
Specialist 
gastroenterology 
consult- - D53
Sr. 
NoComplication Intervention PHC CHC DH
9Leg ulcers Dressings Y Y Y
Antibiotics-oral, 
topicalY Y Y
Pain treatment- 
NSAIDsY Y Y
Opioids - Y Y
Hydroxyurea Y Y Y
Chronic BT - - Y
Surgery consultation - Y Y
Plastic surgery consult/ 
skin graft- - Refer to higher 
centre
10Eye disease
Sickle retinopathyRefraction Y Y Y
Ocular tension - D Y
Fundus examination
(Fundus photos for 
online consult)- Y Y
Eye specialist 
consultation- D Y
11 Neurological 
disease
Headache
Stroke
Cognitive 
dysfunction
SeizuresInvestigations
CT Scan
MRI
EEG- - D
Aspirin Y Y Y
HU Y Y Y
BT - Y Y
Seizures- drugs AED Y Y Y
Drugs - headache Y Y Y
Neurology Specialist 
consultation- - Refer to higher 
centre
OT/PT - Y Y
Facilities at the next referral centre would include services available at the referring centre besides other 
services
*Proteinuria defined as 1+ or more on two occasions in an overnight first pass urine sample or timed 
urine collection exceeding 500mg/dl. UTI or hematuria should be ruled out, screen for Diabetes 
Mellitus& Hypertension.
Y: Yes; N: No; D: Desirable; OT/PT: Occupational Therapy/Physiotherapy; BT: Blood transfusion; 
SNRI: Serotonin Nor-epinephrine Reuptake Inhibitor, PBF-Peripheral Blood Film, ESA-Erythropoiesis 
Stimulating Agent; CBT: Cognitive Behavioural Therapy; PH: Pulmonary Hypertension; PAH-
Pulmonary Artery Hypertension; AED-Anti-epileptic drugs. 54
ANNEXURE 7 :
LIST OF MEDICINE (ACCORDING TO LEVEL OF FACILITY)
Essential Medicines at various Health facilities
SDH/ DH CHC PHC SHC
Hydroxyurea Capsule 
*Hydroxyurea 
CapsuleHydroxyurea 
CapsuleHydroxyurea Capsule
Clonidine Tablet Ferrous Salt (A) + 
Folic Acid (B)Ferrous Salt (A) + 
Folic Acid (B)Ferrous Salt (A) + Folic Acid 
(B)
Ferrous Salt (A) + Folic 
Acid (B)Ferrous Salts Ferrous Salts Ferrous sulphate + Folic acid 
Syrup
Ferrous Salts Folic Acid Tablet Folic Acid Tablet Folic Acid Tablet
Folic Acid Tablet Iron Sucrose 
InjectionIFA syrup NSAIDs
Iron Sucrose Injection Heparin Sodium 
Injection
Heparin Sodium 
InjectionWarfarin Tablet
Warfarin Tablet IFA syrup
Ibuprofen tablet/ 
Syrup
Diclofenac Tablet/ Inj
Paracetamol tablet/ 
syrup Ibuprofen tablet/ 
Syrup
Diclofenac Tablet/ 
Inj
Paracetamol tablet/ 
syrup Ibuprofen Oral 
Liquid / Tablet
Diclofenac Tablet/ Inj
Paracetamol tablet/ 
syrup Ibuprofen tablet
Diclofenac Tablet/ Inj
Paracetamol tablet/ syrup 
Penicillin Penicillin Penicillin Penicillin
Clarithromycin Tablet Clarithromycin 
Tablet 
Desferrioxamine 
Injection
Enalapril Tablet Enalapril Tablet Enalapril Tablet Enalapril Tablet 
Tramadol capsule/ Inj
Morphine Tablet/ Inj
Codeine Tablet/ Oral 
solutionTramadol capsule/ 
Inj
Morphine Tablet/ 
Inj
Codeine Tablet/ 
Oral solutionTramadol capsule 
* As per IPHS, Hydroxyurea is available at SDH/DH, However, in states with high endemicity, Hydroxy 
urea can be made available up to the level of PHC by indenting from DH, with a system of monthly 
dispension to the CHO (in charge of HWC-SC) for identified SCD patients with a mandatory criteria of 
monthly follow up and required testing by the medical officer at PHC. 55
ANNEXURE 8 :
INDICATION FOR REFFERAL
Indications for referral to 
Medical officer at PHC: • Acute pain without any relief with NSAID & hydration in 1 hour
• Pain with associated features: 
	Vomiting and unable to take medicines.
	Pain with documented fever more than 100.4°F/38°
	Pain with respiratory distress, either respiratory rate 
more than 24/min or saturation less than 95%
	Pain with increased jaundice or cola coloured urine or 
brown to black urine
• Acute abdominal pain with distension
• Central chest pain more than 20 minutes
• Chest pain associated with breathing difficulty or low oxygen 
saturation less than 95%
• Fever documented to be more than 100.4°F/38°C 
• Haemoptysis or blood in sputum 
• Stroke- motor weakness, asymmetrical face, unable to speak 
coherently, confused, unresponsive to command or pain 
• Blood in urine or decreased urine output (frequency less than 4 
times or subjective reduction in volume 
• Painful penile erection 
• Acute worsening of skin pallor or jaundice 
• Cold clammy skin/ impending shock 
• Fits or seizures 
• All pregnant patients 
• Swollen Feet 
• Progressive difficulty in breathing superimposed on baseline 
limitation or on activities of daily living 
Indication for referral to 
CHC • Need for overnight hospitalisation- moderate-severe pain 
requiring opioid, mild -moderate acute chest syndrome
• Need for simple blood transfusion
• Need for clinic-based service56
Indication for referral to 
District Hospital• Need for ICU
• Need for Exchange transfusion
• High risk ANC/delivery in SCD mother
• Specialty consultation- pain specialist, cardiology, pulmonology, 
neurology, nephrology, ophthalmology, Orthopaedics, surgery
• Specialty investigations and labs- HPLC, Electrophoresis, ECHO, 
PFT, CT
• At any level, the MO or specialist may evaluate for ambulatory 
care or admission to facility. Some of the criteria that necessitates 
admission is given below;
• Admission criteria 
• Moderate to severe pain requiring overnight stay or not relieved 
in 6 hours’ time with/without persistent vomiting not relieved 
with medication and requiring parenteral hydration
• Fever with sepsis (fever with altered mental status or Respiratory 
rate>24/min or hypotension)
• Acute onset of Hypoxia (SpO2<95% on room air or exercise 
desaturation greater than or equal to 5% from baseline or 
PaO2<80mmHg, assuming at sea level) due to any cause.
• Hypotension
• DVT/PTE
• Acute sequestration crisis
• Hyper-haemolytic crisis
• Acute anaemia with haemoglobin decline >2gm% from baseline
• Blood transfusion
• Seizures/ Stroke
• Acute renal failure
• Priapism
• Delivery in SCD patient.
• Some patients may need admission for evaluation of their 
chronic complications and inpatient evaluation can expedite this 
process. 
• Social conditions can complicate the way patients access 
healthcare. These factors (e.g. long travel distance) may also be 
considered while evaluating admission criteria. 57
Indications for referral to 
tertiary centre• Acute persistent Abdominal pain refractory to opioids and fluid 
therapy 
• Acute Cholecystitis 
• New AST/ALT elevation more than 3 or 4 times of normal 
• Fulminant Priapism lasting more than 4 hours 
• Acute onset Hemiparesis 
• Acute New onset Seizures
• Altered level of Consciousness 
• Acute Respiratory Distress / Haemoptysis 
• Oxygen Saturation < 95% on oxygen mask 
• Persistent fever > 100*F documented on > 2 occasions despite 
antibiotics 
• Painful persistent joint swelling
• Consultation with certain speciality/ areas and commensurate 
medicines/investigations may not be available at DH (as defined 
in IPHS) and hence would require further management at higher 
centres58
 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
ABHA Ayushman Bharat Health Account
AB-HWC Ayushman Bharat - Health and Wellness Centres
ACS Acute Chest Syndrome
ANM Auxiliary Nurse Midwife
ASHA Accredited Social Health Activist
ASHA Accredited Social Health Activist
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy
BCC Behaviour Change Communication
BMT Blood or marrow transplant 
CAS Community Arogya Samiti
CBC Complete Blood Count
CHO Community Health Officer
CoE Centres of Excellence
CPHC Comprehensive Primary Healthcare
CSIR Council of Scientific & Industrial Research 
CVS Chorionic Villous Sampling
DBS Dried Blood Spot
DH District Hospital
DHS District Health Society
EMRS Eklavya Model Residential School
GeM Government e Marketplace 
Hb Haemoglobin
Hb A Normal Haemoglobin
Hb S Sickle Heamoglobin
HPLC High-performance liquid chromatography
ICMR  Indian Council of Medical Research
IEC Information, Education & Communication
JAS Jan Arogya Samiti
MAS Mahila Arogya Samiti 
MO Medical Officer
MoTA Ministry of Tribal Affairs59
MPW Multi-Purpose Worker
NGO Non-governmental organization
NHM National Health Mission
NSAID Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
OPD Outdoor Patient Department
PCP Primary Care Physicians
PHC-HWC Primary Health Centre– Health and Wellness Centre
PMSMA Pradhan Mantri Surakshit Matritva Abhiyan
PMSSY Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana
PoC Point of Care
PSG Patient Support Group
RBC Red Blood Cell
RBSK Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram
RKSK Rashtriya Kishore Swasthya Karyakram
SCD Sickle Cell Disease
SCT Sickle Cell Trait
SHC-HWC Sub Health Centre - Health and Wellness Centre
SN Staff Nurse
TCD Transcranial Doppler 
TIA Transient Ischemic attack
UHWC Urban Health and Wellness Centre
ULB Urban Local Bodies
UPHC-HWC Urban Primary Health Centre – Health and Wellness Centre
VHSNC Village Health, Sanitation, and Nutrition Committees
VHSND Village Health, Sanitation, and Nutrition Day
VOC Vaso-occlusive crisis60
LIST O F CONTRIBUTORS
OVERALL LEADERSHIP & GUIDANCE 
•	Sh. Rajesh Bhushan, Secretary, MoHFW
•	Ms. Roli Singh, Former AS&MD, MoHFW
•	Sh. Vishal Chauhan, Joint Secretary (Policy), MoHFW
•	Maj Gen (Prof) Atul Kotwal, Executive Director, NHSRC
WORKING GROUP
•	Sh. Harsh Mangla, Director, NHM-I, MoHFW
•	Dr. (Flt Lt). M.A. Balasubramanya, Former Advisor, Community Process & Comprehensive 
Primary Healthcare, NHSRC
•	Dr. Neha Dumka, Lead Consultant, Knowledge Management Division, NHSRC
•	Dr. Arghyadeep Marik, Senior Consultant, Blood Cell, MoHFW
•	Ms. Saranga Panwar, Senior Consultant, (NHM PHP & P, Blood Cell), MoHFW
•	Mr. Prasanth KS, Sr. Consultant, Public Health Administration, NHSRC
•	Dr. Anantha Kumar Srinivasaiyer, Senior Consultant, Community Process & Comprehensive 
Primary Healthcare, NHSRC
•	 Dr. Palak, Consultant, Public Health Administration, NHSRC
•	Dr. Anwar Mirza, Former Consultant, Community Process & Comprehensive Primary Healthcare, 
NHSRC
•	Ms. Preethu Prasanna Kumar Consultant, Public Health Administration, NHSRC
•	Dr. Shayoni Sen, Consultant Community process & Comprehensive Primary Healthcare, NHSRC
•	Dr. Bhawna Gupta, Former Consultant Community Processes & Comprehensive Primary 
Healthcare, NHSRC
•	Dr. Rutuja Kolhe, Consultant Community Processes & Comprehensive Primary Healthcare, 
NHSRC
TECHNICAL EXPERTS 
•	Dr. (Col)Jyoti Kotwal, Prof. & Head, Department of Hematology, Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, New 
Delhi
•	Dr. Mukul Aggarwal, Assistant Professor in Clinical Hematology, Department of Hematology, 
AIIMS, New Delhi
•	 Dr.Aparup Das,Director,ICMR-NIRTH,Jabalpur
•	Dr.Ravindra Kumar, Scientist ‘C’, ICMR-NIRTH,Jabalpur
•	Dr Ruby Khan, State Nodal Officer Blood Cell / NHM,Madhya Pradesh
•	 Dr. Bimlesh Singh, Pathologist ,District  Hospital, Ranchi
•	Dr. Khemraj Sonwani, Deputy Director Blood Cell, Chattisgarh
•	Dr. Usha Joshi, Director General Sickle Cell Institute, Chattisgarh
•	Dr. Yezdi Italia, Director Valsad Raktdan Kendra,Gujrat62
National Health Systems Resource Centre
Design & Printed at Royal Press # 9310132888