PRESERVING PROGRESS ON NUTRITION IN INDIA: 
POSHAN ABHIYAAN IN PANDEMIC TIMES
Designed b y
 JULY 21POSHAN ABHIYAANPRESERVING PROGRESS ON 
NUTRITION IN INDIA:
IN PANDEMIC TIMESPRESERVING PROGRESS ON 
NUTRITION IN INDIA:
POSHAN ABHIYAAN
IN PANDEMIC TIMESAUTHORS: This Report is prepared by a team at WCD Division, NITI Aayog (under 
guidance of Dr. Vinod K. Paul, Member (Health), led by Dr. Rakesh Sarwal, Additional 
Secretary (Health & Nutrition), Dr. Neena Bhatia (Senior Specialist), Dr. Supreet Kaur 
(Senior Consultant), Mr. Kumar Supravin (Senior Consultant), Ms. Prepsa Saini (Consultant) 
and Ms Parnika Singh (Intern) along with a team from the International Food Policy 
Research Institute (IFPRI) led by Dr. Purnima Menon (Senior Research Fellow), Rasmi 
Avula (Research Fellow), Phuong Hong Nguyen (Senior Research Fellow), Monika Walia 
(Data Manager), Esha Sarswat (Communications Specialist), Sattvika Ashok (Research 
Analyst), Shivani Kachwaha (Research Analyst), Anita Christopher (Research Analyst).
NITI Aayog acknowledges the contributions of the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and all State Governments for 
sharing the updated information to prepare the report.Contents
List of Figures v
List of Tables vii
List of Boxes vii
Abbreviations ix
Executive Summary 1
Introduction 1
Methodology 2
Findings 2
Key recommendations 5
1. Introduction 7
1.1 Overview of POSHAN Abhiyaan 7
1.2 Objectives of POSHAN Abhiyaan IV Progress Report 11
2. Methodology 13
2.1 Progress tracking framework 13
2.2 Data collection from states 14
2.3 Data collection from line Ministries 15
2.4 Data collection from development partners 15
2.5 Data analysis 15
2.6 Limitations 20
3. What progress have we made to date? 21
3.1  What progress have States made on delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan? 21
3.2 Conclusion and Way Forward 40
4. Jan Andolan and Multi-Sectoral Interventions 43
4.1 Background 43
iii
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
4.2 Jan Andolan 43
4.3 Multi-sectoral involvement 48
4.4 Conclusion and Way Forward 54
5. Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic:  
How are States doing? 57
5.1 Women and child development services 57
5.2 Maternal and Child Health Services 69
5.3  Multi-sectoral involvement and policy action during COVID-19 88
5.4 Conclusion and Way Forward 92
6. Conclusions and Recommendations 95
7. Key Takeaways from POSHAN Abhiyaan 99
Lesson 1:  POSHAN Abhiyaan has helped to bring a strong focus on improving 
nutrition outcomes during the first 1,000 days. 99
Lesson 2:  POSHAN Abhiyaan has enabled a Nation-wide Jan Andolan  
catalysing nutrition related behaviour change at scale for positive  
impact on feeding and health care practices 101
Lesson 3:  POSHAN Abhiyaan demonstrated that the processes for  
Inter-sectoral convergence are effectively operationalized through  
in place institutional mechanisms at multiple levels 102
Lesson 4:  POSHAN Abhiyaan showed that Technology can be leveraged for  
real time monitoring of large scale health and nutrition programmes 103
Lesson 5:  POSHAN Abhiyaan supported the resilience of health and  
nutrition systems during COVID-19 pandemic 104
Reflection on POSHAN Abhiyaan based on early results available for 22 states  
from NFHS-5 105
8. References 107
9. Annexures 109
Annexure 1a:  State template-Women and Child Development 109
Annexure 1b:  State Template-Health 115
Annexure 2:  Rubric 119
Annexure 3:  State score dashboard overall 125
Annexure 4:  POSHAN Abhiyaan II Monitoring Report: Data Collection Form  
for MOWCD 134
Annexure 5:  Concordance check between State Template Indicators and  
MPR/HMIS Data 164
Annexure 6:  Top and bottom performing States/UTs based on Indicators  
used in Rubric 165
iv
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
ContentsList of Figures
List of Figures
Figure 1: Overall Implementation Status of POSHAN Abhiyaan at the  
National-Level in 2020 3
Figure 2: Pillars of POSHAN Abhiyaan 8
Figure 3: Targets of POSHAN Abhiyaan 9
Figure 4: Critical components for examining the progress to date on rolling  
out POSHAN Abhiyaan in the WCD and Health departments 16
Figure 5: Overall implementation status of POSHAN Abhiyaan* at the  
national-level in 2020 22
Figure 6: State-wise scores for Government and Institutional Mechanism 23
Figure 7: State-wise comparison of the Percentage Funds utilized up to  
FY 2018-19 and FY 2017-18 and up to FY 2019-20 25
Figure 8: Constitution of committees: Comparison between 2019 and 2020 25
Figure 9: Percentage of districts that have developed and submitted CAP  
for FY 2019-20 compared to FY 2020-21 at the national level 26
Figure 10: State-wise scores for strategy and planning 27
Figure 11: State-wise scores for Inputs for service delivery and capacity:  
Women and Child Development Department 29
Figure 12: Distribution of supplies to districts: Comparison between 2019  
and 2020 30
Figure 13: Percentage of CDPOs trained on ICDS Dashboard/Mobile Phones: 
Comparison between 2019 and 2020 32
Figure 14: State-wise scores for inputs for service delivery essentials:  
Health Department 33
Figure 15: Percentage of functional health facilities: Comparison between  
2019 and 2020 35
Figure 16: Percentage of ANM positions filled: Comparison between 2019  
and 2020 35
Figure 17: State-wise scores for programme activities and intervention  
coverage – Women and Child Development Department 36
Figure 18: State-wise scores for Programme activities and intervention  
coverage- Health Department 39
Figure 19: Poshan Maah performance by participation across India, 2020 45
Figure 20: Poshan Maah performance by participation: Comparison between  
2019 and 2020 45
Figure 21: Themes covered under POSHAN Maah, 2020 46
v
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Figure 22: Policy guidance for implementation platforms and interventions  
across life stages 58
Figure 23: Changes in supplementary nutrition as per MPR data, October  
2019 to December 2020 60
Figure 24: Disruption and restoration of supplementary nutrition among  
children 6 months to 6 years of age during the COVID-19  
pandemic, MPR data, October 2019 to December 2020 61
Figure 25: Disruption and restoration of supplementary nutrition among  
pregnant and lactating women during pandemic, MPR data,  
October 2019 to December 2020 62
Figure 26: Policy guidance for interventions during pregnancy, postnatal  
and early childhood period 71
Figure 27: Changes in number of pregnant women received full course of  
180 IFA tablets, 4 or more ANC check-ups from October 2019 to 
December 2020 72
Figure 28: Disruption and restoration of number of pregnant women who  
received 180+ IFA tablets, HMIS Data, October 2019-December 2020 73
Figure 29: Disruption and restoration of number of pregnant women who  
received four or more ANC visits, HMIS Data, October 2019-  
December 2020 75
Figure 30: Changes in the number of institutional deliveries conducted and  
the number of women receiving the first post-partum check-up  
between 48 hours and 14 days from October 2019 to December 2020 76
Figure 31: Disruption and restoration of number of institutional deliveries  
conducted (including C-section), HMIS Data October 2019-  
December 2020 77
Figure 32: Disruption and restoration of number of women who received  
postpartum check-ups between 48 hours and 14 days, HMIS Data,  
October 2019-December 2020 79
Figure 33: Changes in number of children who received fully immunized (9-11 
months), 6 HBNC visits (newborns), and health check-up (severely 
underweighted children 0-5 years) from October 2019 to December  
2020. 80
Figure 34: Disruption and restoration of number of children (9-11 months) fully 
immunised, HMIS Data, October 2019-December 2020 81
Figure 35: Disruption and restoration of number of newborns who received  
6 HBNC visits after institutional delivery, HMIS Data October 
2019-December 2020 83
Figure 36: Disruption and restoration of number of severely underweighted  
children (0-5 years) who received health check-ups, HMIS Data,  
October 2019- December 2020 84
vi
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
List of FiguresList of Tables
List of Tables
List of BoxesTable 1:  Progress and implementation score themes for WCD and Health 
Departments 14
Table 2:  Categorisation of States 18
Table 3:  Service disruption and restoration definition and formulae 19
Table 4:  Utilization of funds: Comparison between FY 2017-18 to 2018-19  
and FY 2017-18 to FY 2019-20 24
Table 5:  Key activities performed during Poshan Maah by Line Ministries 47
Table 6:  Summary of ICDS programme delivery innovations in the context  
of COVID-19, as reported by State Governments 63
Table 7:  Summary of health programme delivery innovations in the context  
of COVID-19, as reported by State Governments 85
Box 1: Brief outline of the first three POSHAN Abhiyaan progress reports 10
Box 2:  Steps to generate the progress and implementation score 17
Box 3:  Improving the micronutrient profile of the ICDS beneficiaries 54
Box 4:  Study to assess the THR production and distribution across  
12 districts in Jharkhand and Rajasthan 67
Box 5:  Frontline health workers enable restoration of health and nutrition service 
delivery after early COVID-19 lockdown: Findings from a  
seven-state observational study 68
vii
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Abbreviations
A&T — Alive and Thrive
AMB — Anaemia Mukt Bharat
ANC — Antenatal Care
ANM — Auxiliary Nurse Midwife
ASHA — Accredited Social Health Activist
AWC — Anganwadi Centre
AWW — Anganwadi Worker
AYUSH —Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and 
Homoeopathy 
BRG — Block Resource Group
CAP — Convergence Action Plan
CAS — Common Application Software
CBE — Community-Based Event
CDPO — Child Development Project Officer
CIFF — Children’s Investment Fund Foundation
CHC — Community Health Centre
CMAM — Community-based management of acute malnutrition
CNNS — Comprehensive National Nutrition Survey
CPMU — Central Programme Management Unit
DAY–NRLM —Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana – National Rural Livelihoods 
Mission
DMEO — Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office 
DRG — District Resource Group
DWCD — Department of Women and Child Development 
DPO — Development Project Officer 
DWS — Drinking Water and Sanitation
EIBF — Early Initiation of Breastfeeding
ix
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
FLW — Frontline Workers
FSSAI — Food Safety and Standards Authority of India
H&FW — Health & Family Welfare
HBNC — Home-Based Newborn Care
HBYC — Home-Based Care of Young Child
HMIS — Health Monitoring Information System 
HR — Human Resource
HWC — Health and Wellness Centres 
ICDS — Integrated Child Development Scheme
IDCF — Intensified Diarrhoea Control Fortnight 
IEC — Information, Education and Communication
IFA — Iron and Folic Acid
ILA — Integrated Learning Approach
ISSNIP—Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Systems 
Strengthening and Nutrition Improvement Programme 
IYCF — Infant and Young Child Feeding
JAS — Jan Arogya Samiti
JSSK — Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram
JSY — Janani Suraksha Yojana
LiST — Lived Saved Tool
LBW — Low Birth Weight
LS — Lady Supervisor
MAM — Moderate Acute Malnutrition 
MAS — Mahila Arogya Samitis
MDMS — Mid-Day Meal Scheme
MGNREGS —Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme
MHRD — Ministry of Human Resource Development
MoHFW — Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
MNREGA —Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act
MoE — Ministry of Education
MoPRI — Ministry of Panchayati Raj Institutions
MoRD — Ministry of Rural Development
MPR — Monthly Progress Report
MTC — Malnutrition Treatment Centre 
MoWCD — Ministry of Women and Child Development
NCoE-SAM — National Centre of Excellence for Management of SAM 
NDD — National Deworming Day 
NFHS — National Family Health Survey
NGO — Non-Governmental Organisation
x
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AbbreviationsNHM — National Health Mission
NRC — Nutritional Rehabilitation Centre 
NREGA — National Rural Employment Guarantee Assurance 
NRLM — National Rural Livelihood Mission 
ODF — Open Defecation Free
ORS — Oral Rehydration Salts
PCV — Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine 
PDS — Public Distribution System
PMMVY — Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana
PMO — Prime Minister’s Office
PRI — Panchayati Raj Institutions 
PMSMA — Pradhan Mantri Surakshit Matrutva Abhiyaan
POSHAN —Prime Minister’s Overarching Scheme for Holistic 
Nourishment 
RBSK — Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram 
RKSK — Rashtriya Kishori Swasthya Karyakram 
RMNCH+A — Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child, and Adolescent 
RD — Rural Development
RVV — Rotavirus Vaccine
SAM — Severe Acute Malnutrition
SBCC — Social and Behavioural Change Communication
SBM — Swacch Bharat Mission 
SCoE-SAM — State Centre of Excellences for Management of SAM 
SHG — Self-Help Group
SNCU — Special Newborn Care Unit 
SNP — Supplementary Nutrition Programme
SNRC — State Nutrition Resource Centre
THR — Take-Home Ration
TINI — The India Nutrition India 
TPDS — Targeted Public Distribution System 
UHSND — Urban Health Sanitation and Nutrition Day 
ULB — Urban Local Body
UPHC — Urban Primary Health Care 
UT — Union Territory
VHSND — Village Health Sanitation Nutrition Day
WCD — Women and Child Development
WFP — World Food Programme
Abbreviations
xi
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
XXX
X
INTRODUCTION
In 2018, the Government of India launched its flagship programme, the POSHAN (Prime 
Minister’s Overarching Scheme for Holistic Nourishment) Abhiyaan, to draw national 
attention to and take action against malnutrition, in a mission-mode.
POSHAN Abhiyaan is the Government of India’s flagship programme to improve nutritional 
outcomes for children, pregnant women and lactating mothers, and adolescents. The 
Abhiyaan is a multi-ministerial convergence mission with the vision to accelerate India’s 
progress on malnutrition, in a time bound manner with fixed target. Specifically, the 
mission attempts to (1) deliver a high impact package of interventions in the first 1,000 
days of a child’s life; (2) strengthen the delivery of these interventions through technology 
and management; (3) improve the capacity of frontline workers (FLWs); (4) facilitate 
cross-sectoral convergence to address the multi-dimensional nature of malnutrition; and 
(5) enhance behaviour change and community mobilization.
Although progress towards improving nutrition outcomes, such as stunting, wasting, 
anaemia and low birth weight (LBW), requires a long-term commitment, changes in 
critical implementation elements, programme coverage and household behaviours to 
accelerate  nutritional improvements can be achieved in shorter timeframes.
This fourth progress report on POSHAN Abhiyaan (1) assesses the progress of POSHAN 
Abhiyaan implementation (2) analyses the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on nutrition 
and health services; and (3) provides insights on service delivery restorations and 
adaptations and other related needs across India. This report presents key recommendations 
to deepen India’s efforts to tackle malnutrition, especially in the context of COVID-19. 
Lastly, the report highlights five key lessons learned by the implementation of POSHAN 
Abhiyaan over the last three years, including following the onset of the coronavirus 
pandemic.Executive 
Summary
1
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
METHODOLOGY
Various data sources were used to generate the findings in this report. NITI Aayog collected 
information from State and Union Territories (UTs) using two questionnaires to assess 
progress and implementation capabilities on infrastructure, human resources, training 
and capacity building, convergence, programme and output activities, service delivery 
by FLWs during COVID-19 and the status of innovation and the flexi-plan for March and 
July 2020 (Annexure 1). A progress and implementation score framework was developed 
to assess the progress and capabilities of State and UTs using the data collected.
NITI Aayog also sought information from key ministries on their initiatives launched under 
the auspices of POSHAN Abhiyaan, focusing on interventions during the first 1,000 days. 
Furthermore, field-level development partners were encouraged to collect information 
on new initiatives, stories of change and models that can be scaled-up and replicated, 
and inspiring anecdotes of exceptional individuals working towards improving nutritional 
outcomes at the ground-level in the country. NITI Aayog collected this information to 
align with the strategic pillars of POSHAN Abhiyaan—namely, convergence, training 
and capacity building, Integrated Child Development Services – Common Application 
Software (ICDS-CAS) (now POSHAN Tracker Tool), innovations, and behaviour change 
and IEC advocacy.
In addition, multiple data sources were used to assess policy guidance, adaptations and 
changes in the coverage of key health and nutrition services during the pandemic. State-
level policy guidance from March until October 2020 was examined for 13 States ( Andhra 
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal) using the available 
state policy documents in the POSHAN COVID-19 Monitoring report . Data  from the state 
templates were used to track the service delivery adaptations and innovations made 
during the pandemic.
Finally, Health Monitoring Information System (HMIS) data and monthly progress report 
(MPR) data from Anganwadi Centres (AWC) from October 2019 to December 2020 were 
analysed to examine changes in the coverage of health interventions over the course of 
the pandemic.
FINDINGS
This report assesses the implementation of the Mission. A rubric was designed and scores 
for states and UTs were tabulated based on their performance in governance, strategy 
and planning, availability of inputs, and coverage of key programme activities under 
Women and Child Development (WCD) and Health. Figure 1 highlights the performance 
of states and UTs based on these scores.
2
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Executive Summary0102030405060708090100
Maharas htra
Andhra Prades h
Gujarat
Tamil Nadu
Madhya  Pradesh
Himachal Prad esh
Telangan a
Karnataka
Odisha
Jharkhand
Chattisgarh
Haryana
Uttarakhand
Rajasthan
Uttar Prades h
Kerala
Assam
Bihar
Punjab
Sikkim
Meghalaya
Tripura
Goa
Nagaland
Mizoram
Aruna chal Prades h
Manipur
D & N Haveli & Daman…
Chandigarh
Anda man & Nicobar
Jammu & Kashmi r
Lakshadweep
Delhi
Puduc herry
LadakhScoreWCD Health
Large Sta tes Small States  UTs 
Figure 1: Overall Implementation Status of POSHAN Abhiyaan at the National-Level in 2020
Maximum Score: 100
First, on a positive note, system readiness and capabilities to deliver POSHAN Abhiyaan 
interventions improved from previous POSHAN Abhiyaan progress reports. The coverage 
of service delivery is also acceptable for many WCD and health activities. Efforts to 
prioritize systems preparedness and expand the coverage of key interventions between 
2018 and 2020 have likely contributed to the achievements observed during this period.
Second, there is mixed progress across multiple indicators on delivering POSHAN 
Abhiyaan between States. Overall, fund utilization is low, with less than half of funds 
utilised in 23 States and UTs. Notably, fund utilization is lower in States and UTs with a 
low distribution of mobile phones and growth monitoring devices. There are also gaps in 
the occupation of HR positions. The constitution of district- and block-level convergence 
action plan committees is not uniform across States and UTs, which has implications for 
preparing convergence action plans—the roadmap for achieving convergence.
State scores varied across service delivery indicators, including HR, infrastructure, 
supplies, training, and capacity building. To continue progress under POSHAN Abhiyaan, 
gaps in HR positions must be closed, particularly in States where less than half of the 
required positions are filled. There is also a need to close supply gaps in some States. In 
addition, several States are underperforming in staff training on e-ILA modules; therefore, 
identifying and tackling the determinants for these gaps in training is crucial.
In terms of WCD programme coverage, many States and UTs have distributed take-home 
rations (THR) to all beneficiaries. However, coverage remains low in Bihar (65% pregnant 
women, 62% lactating women, and 52% children), Punjab (78% pregnant women, 76% 
lactating women, and 65% children), Sikkim (84% pregnant women, 84% lactating women, 
and 77% children),and Jammu and Kashmir (49% pregnant women, 51% lactating women, 
and 54% children). In addition, the percentage of under-five children weighed at AWCs 
is still low in many States and UTs.
Executive Summary
3
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
There are also prevailing gaps in programme activities conducted by health departments. 
While the coverage of indicators like early initiation of breastfeeding (EIBF), 180 days 
of iron and folic acid (IFA) received by pregnant women and tetanus toxoid (TT2)/
boosters received by pregnant women is acceptable in most States and UTs, the 
coverage is relatively low for pregnant women who received albendazole tablets after 
the first trimester, lactating women who received IFA, and children who received iron 
and folic acid (IFA) syrup. Thus, service delivery across anaemia interventions must 
be strengthened. Additionally, States like Bihar, Jharkhand, Kerala, Punjab, Rajasthan, 
Telangana, Uttarakhand, North-eastern States and UTs must focus on child immunisation, 
antenatal care (ANC) check-ups, and the use of oral rehydration solution (ORS) for 
treating diarrhoea.
Overall, there is scope to improve the coverage of interventions during the first 1,000 
days. In particular, low coverage of THR, growth monitoring, and IFA supplements across 
the life stages need special attention. To this end, challenges on the supply- and demand-
side should be assessed to improve intervention coverage during this critical window of 
opportunity. 
This report analyses the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the delivery of key essential 
services and the actions taken by various line Ministries, State Health Departments and 
State WCD Departments to deliver the services despite the pandemic.
Third, the analysis of service disruptions, drawing primarily from publicly available 
administrative data, highlights substantial disruptions in the immediate months following 
the onset of the pandemic. Encouragingly, by mid-2020, many services had been 
restored, and by December 2020, a similar level of service delivery had been achieved 
as in December 2019.
Fourth, the findings on early restorations and adaptations to service delivery are promising 
and highlight a commitment across policy, implementation and frontline toward restoring 
essential services in health, nutrition and social safety nets. Various adaptations to service 
delivery were observed across platforms and interventions, which have contributed to 
recovery in service provision. 
Although there are encouraging signs of recovery, the pandemic has already set in 
motion negative impacts on the education of adolescent girls. Evidence shows that 
education is critical to prevent early marriage, which, in turn, contributes to preventing 
early childbearing in India. The potential risks of early marriage in the context of the 
pandemic are higher, but little is known about the extent of the challenge. 
This report highlights five key lessons learned from the implementation of the POSHAN 
Abhiyaan over the past three years, including amid the COVID-19 pandemic. First, POSHAN 
Abhiyaan has prioritised improving nutrition outcomes during the first 1,000 days and has 
expanded the focus of nutrition programmes from merely distributing food supplements 
to actively engaging supply- and demand-side stakeholders. Second, POSHAN Abhiyaan 
created a nationwide Jan Andolan  to influence behaviour change, and has galvanized 
active participation of all stakeholders. Third, POSHAN Abhiyaan has demonstrated that 
intersectoral convergence is possible through in-place institutional mechanisms, and has 
4
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Executive Summaryprovided various health and nutrition services across the same beneficiaries. Fourth, the 
Abhiyaan has demonstrated that technology can be leveraged for real-time monitoring 
of large-scale health and nutrition programmes. Fifth, the Abhiyaan has highlighted the 
resilience of health and nutrition systems during the COVID-19 pandemic.
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
 ÂExpand coverage and improve quality of essential health and nutrition 
interventions by continuing to strengthen the ICDS and health platforms
 Strengthen governance and institutional mechanisms that trigger effective 
implementation processes. Assess and close gaps in fund utilization and 
expedite the constitution of committees and groups to ensure preparation 
and execution of effective Convergence Action Plans (CAPs).
 Operationalize the CAPs so that the convergence is outcome-oriented and 
interventions across sectors reach the target beneficiaries. For this, it is 
important to train the field staff on sharing information and data among 
themselves.
 To close the gaps on procurement of smartphones, the Anganwadi Workers 
(AWWs) can be incentivized for data entry on online application or providing 
monthly allowance for rental/usage for using their own devices, as an 
alternative.
 Close gaps in HR, infrastructure, supplies, and staff training to strengthen 
service delivery across ICDS and health programmes. Among the ICDS 
services, the priority areas for capacity building includes strengthening of 
growth monitoring and home-based counselling.
 To address the gaps on coverage of programme activities, Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs) should be involved in community engagement, Village 
Health Sanitation Nutrition Day (VHSNDs) in rural areas and Urban Health 
Sanitation Nutrition Day (UHSNDs), Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), Mahila 
Arogya Samiti (MAS), and Urban Primary Health Care (UPHCs) in urban areas 
should be involved in explaining programmatic benefits. Additionally, it is 
recommended that a separate interface within POSHAN Tracker application 
should be formed which would enable two-way communication system to 
address the gaps and challenges at the implementation level.
 Identify reasons for low coverage of certain health and nutrition services, 
including assessment of supply- and demand-side factors.
 ÂServices that will need particular attention in the restoration of services will 
be screening and monitoring of growth of all children, active support towards 
early initiation of breastfeeding (EIBF) and even greater efforts to support 
complementary feeding.
 ÂConvergence-related efforts will need maximum effort in the coming years – 
targeting and focusing all efforts to be sharply goal-focused – we must achieve 
Executive Summary
5
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
the stated goal of household convergence of key programmes, especially those 
addressing the determinants that have seen slow movement or have been 
affected sharply in 2020.
 ÂEfforts to increase household demand for services are also going to be central 
to achieving coverage; therefore, demand creation to access and use of health 
and ICDS services should be a key focus of the social and behavioural change 
component (SBCC) pillar of POSHAN Abhiyaan in 2021.
 ÂThe efforts for convergence with key sectors, especially food and civil supplies 
via the public distribution system (PDS) and rural development via the National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) will be essential for strengthening 
social protection to vulnerable families. This will also ensure that the social 
protection programmes reach families in the first 1,000 days. Furthermore, by 
incorporating nutri-cereals, fortified rice, and other nutritious foods into social 
safety nets will help to make these provisions nutrition-sensitive.
 ÂState- and District-focused diagnostic work, with the support of development 
partners and academic institutions, are required to understand the nature of 
the determinants of poor nutrition and to diagnose and close gaps in systems 
implementation challenges. One size will not fit all States or even all Districts 
within a State, but the data will help diagnose areas for improvement and 
prioritise targeted actions.
 ÂEvidence has accumulated that education is critical to prevent early marriage, 
which in turn is critical to prevent early childbearing in India. The risks of 
increasing early marriage in the context of the pandemic are higher, but little 
is known about the extent of the challenge. Community engagement to ensure 
adolescent girls can return to school and that early marriages are prevented 
will, therefore, also need sharp focus in 2021. Additionally, RKSK may mobilize 
community to prevent early marriage of adolescent girls with the help of FLWs.
In closing, this report and the analysis therein demonstrate that POSHAN Abhiyaan’s 
efforts have settled into the political and programmatic fabric of India. Continued emphasis 
is needed to deepen the commitment, be strategic and geographically focused in 
strengthening the systems to deliver essential nutrition interventions and to strengthen the 
available programmes to induce changes in key social determinants of malnutrition. The 
progress on improving programme coverage, breastfeeding and complementary feeding 
and key determinants of malnutrition such as sanitation coverage shows that results are 
attainable. This report provides directions for every State to embrace the mission fully, 
address their specific systems and population-level challenges, and contribute to helping 
India achieve national and global targets for malnutrition.
6
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Executive SummaryIntroduction
1
1.1 OVERVIEW OF POSHAN ABHIYAAN
Launched by the Prime Minister on International Women’s Day on March 8, 2018 in 
Jhunjhunu, Rajasthan, POSHAN (the Prime Minister’s Overarching Scheme for Holistic 
Nutrition) Abhiyaan aims to prioritize addressing malnutrition in India. Malnutrition can 
have life-long, irreversible impacts, currently affecting one in every three children and 
half of all women in India.1
POSHAN Abhiyaan (previously called the National Nutrition Mission) is the Government 
of India’s flagship programme to improve nutritional outcomes for children, pregnant 
women and lactating mothers. It is a multi-ministerial convergence mission, which aims 
to eliminate malnutrition in India by 2022.
Recognizing that malnutrition levels in India are high, POSHAN Abhiyaan attempts to 
deliver the following features to fight against malnutrition:
1. A high impact package of interventions, focusing on (but not limited to) the first 
1,000 days of a child’s life
2. Strengthening the delivery of a high impact package of interventions through:
 ÂRemodelling nutrition monitoring by leveraging technology and management 
through the Integrated Child Development Services Common Application 
Software (ICDS-CAS) (now POSHAN Tracker Tool);
 ÂImproving capacities of frontline workers through the incremental learning 
approach (ILA) mechanism;
 ÂEmphasising convergent actions among the frontline workforce.
3. A focus on cross-sectoral convergence to emphasise the multi-dimensional nature 
of malnutrition, mapping of various schemes contributing towards addressing 
malnutrition.
1  Global Nutrition Report, 2018
7
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
 ÂConvergence committees at the state, district and block levels will support 
decentralized and convergent planning and implementation, supported by flexi-
pool and innovation funds to encourage contextualised solutions.
4. Ramping up behaviour change communication and community mobilisation through 
Jan Andolan , a national nutrition behaviour change campaign that uses community-
based events, mass media and other approaches.
The Abhiyaan focuses on strengthening policy implementation (at the Central- and 
State-levels) to improve targeting (identification of high burden Districts), enhance 
multi-sectoral convergence, develop innovative service delivery models and rejuvenate 
counselling and community-based monitoring. In addition, the mission acknowledges the 
need for robust convergence mechanisms and coordination to help multiple government 
schemes and programmes reach women and children during the first 1,000 days of life. 
The programme also aims to ensure service delivery of key interventions supported by the 
use of technology and behavioural change. Figure 2 depicts the key pillars of POSHAN 
Abhiyaan that have been proposed to facilitate the objective of the mission.
Figure 2: Pillars of POSHAN Abhiyaan
POSHAN Abhiyaan was first rolled out in 315 priority (high burden) Districts as part of 
Phase I (2017-18), 267 Districts as part of Phase II (2018-19), and in the remaining 136 
Districts as part of Phase III (2019-20). The Abhiyaan has specific targets to be achieved 
across different parameters over the next few years (Figure 3).
POSHAN Abhiyaan is a scheme under ICDS umbrella which converge with other programs 
and service delivering nutrition interventions during the first 1000-days period. These 
include take-home rations (THR) from Anganwadi Centres (AWC); anaemia prevention 
and control under the Anaemia Mukt Bharat (AMB) programme; antenatal care (ANC) 
services; dietary counselling on the Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Day (VHSND); 
and schemes such as Pradhan Mantri Surakshit Matrutva Abhiyaan (PMSMA) and 
Pradhan Mantri Matrtya Vandana Yojana (PMMVY) that provide quality antenatal check-
ups. Schemes like Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY) are promoting institutional deliveries 
through cash transfers, and free services for delivery and early neonatal care are available 
through the Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (JSSK) scheme, which supports mothers 
in establishing appropriate breastfeeding and nutrition practices.
8
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Introduction-•Target: ↓ by 6 percentage points  
@ 2 percentage points per annumPrevent and reduce underweight in 
children (0 6 years)•Target: ↓ by 6 percentage points 
@ 2 percentage points per annumPrevent and reduce stunting in 
children (0-6 years)
•Target: ↓ by 9 percentage points 
@ 3 percentage points per annumReduce the prevalence of anaemia 
among children (6-59 months)
•Target: ↓ by 9 percentage points 
@ 3 percentage points per annumReduce the prevalence of anaemia 
among women and adolescent girls 
15-49 years
•Target: ↓ by 6 percentage points  
@ 2 percentage points per annumReduce low birth weight (LBW)
Figure 3: Targets of POSHAN Abhiyaan
Baseline–NFHS 4 (2015-16)
POSHAN Abhiyaan aims to ensure that every child under 6 years of age, every pregnant 
and lactating woman, and adolescent girl has access to quality services to address 
malnutrition across the continuum of care. This requires a cost-effective, integrated and 
sustainable approach that successfully prevents malnutrition and provides care to those 
who are malnourished. To achieve this, it is important to strengthen the pillars of the 
Abhiyaan in a targeted manner.
Considering the importance of pillars of POSHAN Abhiyaan, the bi-annual POSHAN 
Abhiyaan progress reports have been designed to capture the mission’s progress on 
convergence, training and capacity building, ICDS-CAS, innovations and implementation 
of programme activities conducted by the Women and Child Development (WCD) 
and Health Departments. The first  POSHAN Abhiyaan Progress Report evaluated the 
preparedness of the States/UTs with regards to the mission, the second  report evaluated 
the implementation of the pillars, whereas the third report provided the status of field-
level roll-out. Building upon the first three reports, this fourth report assesses the 
implementation of the key inputs and services. Box 1 outlines the objective and content 
of the previous reports.
Introduction
9
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
BOX 1: BRIEF OUTLINE OF THE FIRST THREE POSHAN 
ABHIYAAN PROGRESS REPORTS
i. POSHAN Abhiyaan’s First Progress Report, submitted in December 2018, 
evaluated the preparedness of States and UTs for POSHAN Abhiyaan. The 
report focused on understanding which systems were in place for the work to 
be carried out from March 2018.
Data were obtained from WCD Departments for all States and UTs (except for 
West Bengal and Odisha). A preparedness score was assigned to each State 
and UT considering the information and data shared. The entire dataset was 
organized into three categories:
 ÂGovernance and institutional mechanism
 ÂStrategy and planning
 ÂService delivery essentials
The State-level preparedness scores helped States identify gaps and inform where 
to direct their resources to improve the parameters where they were lagging to 
combat malnutrition. This detailed analysis, presented in the first progress report 
of POSHAN Abhiyaan, helped States and UTs establish an overarching view and 
examine the factors leading onto the effective implementation of the Abhiyaan.
ii. POSHAN Abhiyaan’s Second Progress Report, submitted in September 2019, 
focused on implementation of parameters covering WCD schemes and Health 
interventions at the State- and UT-levels ( except West Bengal and Odisha ) and 
therefore, inputs/data have been considered from both State WCD and Health 
Departments. The entire dataset was organized into four categories:
 ÂGovernance and institutional mechanism
 ÂStrategy and planning
 ÂService delivery and capacities
 ÂProgramme activities and intervention coverage
iii. POSHAN Abhiyaan’s Third Progress Report, submitted in July 2020, took stock 
of the roll-out status in the field and implementation challenges encountered at 
various levels using secondary data from the National Family and Health Survey 
(NHFS-4) and Comprehensive National Nutrition Survey (CNNS). A modelling 
analysis was conducted using the Lived Saved Tool (LiST) to predict the 
trends in decline of stunting, wasting and anaemia, and assess how POSHAN 
Abhiyaan can scale up coverage of key interventions to accelerate the decline 
in malnutrition.
10
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Introduction1.2 OBJECTIVES OF POSHAN ABHIYAAN IV PROGRESS REPORT
This report outlines India’s progress on the POSHAN Abhiyaan, focusing on preserving 
nutrition progress during the COVID-19 pandemic. The objectives of this report include:
1. Examine the progress to date on rolling out all POSHAN Abhiyaan interventions 
using relevant data;
2. Discuss the importance of preserving progress on the nutrition agenda in the 
context of the COVID-19 pandemic; and
3. Recommend key actions to accelerate progress towards India’s nutrition goals.
Introduction
11
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
2Methodology
This chapter elaborates on the information collected and the methodology for analysing 
data. We examined the progress of States and UTs on implementing POSHAN Abhiyaan 
using multiple data sources, including data from semi-structured questionnaires/templates 
collected by the States &UTs (Annexure 1), monitoring information systems from the 
health department and the ICDS, and additional information from the Ministries. We 
analysed progress between 2019 to 2020 using data from the second progress report 
as the reference point for 2019. Administrative data, including monthly progress report 
(MPR) data of ICDS and Health Management Information System (HMIS) data of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), were utilized to evaluate changes in 
service delivery during the COVID-19 pandemic.
2.1 PROGRESS TRACKING FRAMEWORK
Tracking progress on nutrition helps identify strengths, areas for improvement, and inform 
options for how to most effectively achieve targets within a proposed timeframe. Between 
2019 and 2020, NITI Aayog and development partners jointly developed a framework of 
indicators2 to track progress on nutrition in India. The framework is based on conceptual 
and programmatic frameworks for nutrition, as well as programmatic and biological 
temporality on how change occurs for various nutrition outcomes. First, in relation to 
monitoring progress on the nutrition mission, the team recommended that an assessment 
of progress follows  the programmatic theory of change, as well as programme and 
biological temporality.  Second, the team advised that early progress tracking for the 
nutrition mission should initially focus on system preparedness and readiness, and then 
assess progress on coverage of interventions. Thereafter, the focus may shift to assessing 
changes in determinants and outcomes that are relevant to the programme roll-out. 
The team also outlined which kinds of data to use to track progress on different parts 
of the monitoring framework, focusing on population-level surveys to track progress on 
2  Menon et al. 2020
13
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
outcomes and determinants, and using both population-based surveys and administrative 
data to track progress on intervention coverage.
This report covers the period January to December 2020, which mostly coincides with 
the active implementation of mission activities, following a long period of aligning actions 
across multiple ministries, development partners, states, districts and communities. 
Information on themes covering key elements of the pillars of the mission—namely, 
Convergence, Training and capacity building, ICDS-CAS (now POSHAN Tracker Tool), 
and programme activities —was collected from the Department of Women and Child 
Development (DWCD) and Department of Health of States/UTs. Additionally, information 
on Jan Andolan and interventions undertaken by various line ministries was collected to 
glean insights on behavioural change and IEC advocacy . To this end, the data collected 
for this progress report are aligned with the pillars of POSHAN Abhiyaan.
Information on the data collected for the progress and implementation score framework 
and the methodology for computation of the scores has been described in the subsequent 
sections.
2.2 DATA COLLECTION FROM STATES
Information on the multiple activities which are being conducted by different stakeholders 
across the country under POSHAN Abhiyaan was consolidated using the semi-structured 
questionnaires/templates. For this purpose, a multi-pronged strategy for data collection 
was adopted where NITI Aayog reached out to several central government Ministries, 
States & UTs, and development partners to collect the relevant information.
NITI Aayog prepared two assessment questionnaires that captured information related to 
infrastructure, HR, training and capacity building, convergence, programme and output 
activities, service delivery by FLWs (during the COVID-19 pandemic), and status of 
innovation and flexi-plan for March and July 2020 (Annexure 1).
A progress and implementation score framework was developed to assess the 
information received from the States and UTs. Broadly, this score measures State and 
UT implementation capabilities and progress on the roll-out of POSHAN Abhiyaan. Table 
1 summarises the information that was received from the Women and Child Development 
(WCD) and Health Departments of States/UTs under four themes.
Table 1: Progress and implementation score themes for WCD  
and Health Departments
Theme WCD Department Health Department
Governance and Institutional 
Mechanism Fund Allocation
 Constitution of 
Committees and Resource 
Groups
Strategy and Planning Developed and submitted 
convergence action plan 
(CAP)
14
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
MethodologyTheme WCD Department Health Department
Inputs for Service Delivery & 
Capacities HR
 Supplies
 Training and Capacity 
BuildingInfrastructure
HR
Programme activities and 
intervention coverage Programme activities- 
ICDSProgramme activities
AMB strategy
Each of the four themes in Table 1 comprised a different set of sub-themes for the WCD 
and Health Departments. A total of 40 indicators–22 on WCD and 18 on health were 
included in the framework. These indicators are proxy indicators that intend to reflect the 
progress and implementation status of the States and UTs for each of these categories.
The data collected from the States and UTs also underwent a series of data validation 
processes to verify that the data are logically correct. For this, multiple rounds of video 
conferencing with States/UTs for resolving issues with the data, followed by feedback of 
the States and UTs on the calculated scores and agreement on the same, were carried out.
2.3 DATA COLLECTION FROM LINE MINISTRIES
Central-level information was sought from key Ministries–that is, Ministry of Women and 
Child Development (MoWCD), Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), Ministry 
of Rural Development (MoRD), Ministry of Human Resource Development (now Ministry 
of Education, MoE) and Ministry of Panchayati Raj Institutions (MoPRI)–on their various 
initiatives launched under the auspices of POSHAN Abhiyaan, focusing on interventions 
during the first 1,000 days of life.
2.4 DATA COLLECTION FROM DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS
Development partners with direct presence in the field were encouraged to collect 
information on new initiatives, stories of change, models that can be scaled-up and 
replicated and on individuals who are conducting exceptional and inspirational work 
at the grassroot-level to improve nutrition outcomes in India. These stories have been 
compiled and are featured in this report.
2.5 DATA ANALYSIS
2.5.1  Analysis of data from States on system readiness and service 
delivery
Computation of State/UT scores
A score was computed and assigned to States and UTs to assess their progress on the 
implementation of POSHAN Abhiyaan.
Methodology
15
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
The progress score is comprised of two sub-scores: one for the WCD Department and 
one for the Health Department, both of which have a maximum possible score of 50. 
Overall, the maximum possible progress score was 100.
The questions under each theme and sub-theme were based on previous questionnaires 
and were selected to ensure comparability with the prior report. The questions selected 
for each theme aim to ascertain the progress of states and UTs on the roll-out of POSHAN 
Abhiyaan, as per the administrative guidance from the Centre. These elements were 
common across all States and UTs (Figure 4).
Figure 4: Critical components for examining the progress to date on rolling out POSHAN 
Abhiyaan in the WCD and Health departments
Weights were assigned to the selected indicators for the progress and implementation 
score in consultation with experts. For indicators that assessed the status of implementation 
or roll-out, a range of weights were used that assigned full credit for completed work 
and partial credit for work in progress. For indicators that were measured as proportions, 
credit was assigned according to predetermined ranges. Once the weights were assigned, 
scores were computed for each theme. Finally, all the theme scores were summed to 
compute the overall progress score. Annexure 2 provides the details of the rubric/scoring 
framework. Box 2 elaborates on the process for generating the score.
16
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
MethodologyBOX 2: STEPS TO GENERATE THE PROGRESS AND 
IMPLEMENTATION SCORE
STEP 1. Developing an assessment tool for States/UTs:  NITI Aayog prepared two 
implementation assessment questionnaires (one for Health and one for WCD), 
which captured information on infrastructure, HR, training and capacity building, 
convergence, program and output activities, service delivery by FLW during the 
COVID-19 pandemic and the status of innovation and flexi-plan. These were finalized 
with inputs from several technical stakeholders (Annexure 1).
STEP 2. Data collection at the State/UT-level: The implementation assessment 
questionnaires were sent to State/UT officials in the WCD and Health Departments 
in September 2020. Officials in charge gathered the necessary information to 
complete the questionnaires and returned them to NITI Aayog between October 
and November 2020. Simultaneously, data entry programs were developed in 
CSPro version 6.4. Appropriate skip and logic checks were built into the program 
to identify any data quality issues.
STEP 3. Data cleaning and round 1 entry: Upon receiving the completed 
questionnaires from States and UTs, three independent researchers carried out a 
first round of data entry to identify inconsistencies in the responses. Feedback 
sheets for every State/UT were developed and shared back with the States/UTs 
for revisions and clarifications in November 2020.
STEP 4. Data correction and round 2 entry: Between November 11 and 25, 2020, 
video conferences were held with States/UTs to discuss issues identified in the data. 
Based on these discussions, corrections were made and information was revised in 
the State/UT templates. These corrections were documented and data entered in 
the first round were corrected. After all issues were corrected, the second round of 
data entry took place. This double data entry approach was applied to ensure higher 
data quality. All discrepancies between the two rounds of data were identified and 
corrected.
STEP 5. Data processing and analysis: Stata version 16 was used to compare and 
analyse data from both rounds. The clean and validated data were used to create 
indicators in the scoring framework and assign weights to the scores. Scores for 
relevant indicators were then summed to compute the scores for each theme, which 
were further summed to obtain the progress and implementation score for each 
State/UT based on the scoring framework/rubric.
STEP 6. Data validation by States: All States/UTs were sent their scores and the 
estimates of key indicators used for scoring. Video conferences were held with 
States/UTs between January 8 and 19, 2021, during which all States/UTs were able to 
provide any updates on their responses to the assessment questionnaire and review 
the scores. Only data that were validated by States/UTs were used to compute the 
scores.
Methodology
17
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
STEP 7. Concordance checks with MPR and HMIS data: The data on some of the 
program activities conducted by DWCD and Department of Health were comparable 
to MPR data of ICDS (MoWCD) and HMIS data (MoHFW). If data from State/UT 
templates and MPR/HMIS differed by more than 10%, these States and UTs were 
contacted to verify the data in April 2021. All discrepancies were then addressed 
and corrected. Annexure 5 shows the concordance between the State template 
data and MPR/HMIS data.
STEP 8. Data update & final score calculation: Data were revised based on the 
revisions provided by the States/UTs and the final scores were generated.
Categorisation of States
This report categorises States and UTs into large States, small States, and UTs to enable 
fair comparisons (Table 2).
Table 2: Categorisation of States
CategoryNumber of 
States/UTsList of States/UTs
Large States 19Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, 
Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand
Small States 8Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura
UTs 8Andaman & Nicobar, Chandigarh, D & N Haveli & Daman & Diu, 
Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, Puducherry
*   Categorization of States/UTs is consistent with previous reports that followed the State Health Index Report. 
Findings from Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu have been presented jointly.
Stata version 16 was used to analyse data across survey rounds. All 40 indicators in 
the scoring framework/rubric were measured and assigned weights, as per the defined 
criteria. The individual scores on the 40 indicators were summed to compute the scores 
for each of the themes. Theme scores were then summed as per the scoring framework/
rubric to obtain State/UT progress scores under the WCD and Health Departments.
A set of common indicators between the Second POSHAN Abhiyaan Monitoring Report 
and this report were identified to assess progress between 2019 to 2020 using a 
percentage change formula.
2.5.2 Analysis of administrative data to assess impact of COVID-19
ICDS Monthly Progress Report (MPR)
AWWs prepare the MPR data based on their service registers, which include the details 
of service delivery. The centre-level data are compiled and aggregated to the sector-, 
18
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Methodologyblock-, district- and state-levels and become part of the monitoring information system 
for the ICDS programme. We examined the coverage of supplementary nutrition during 
the pandemic using MPR data between October 2019 and December 2020.
We used State/UT-wise quarterly data for five quarters i.e., from October-December 2019 
to October-December 2020 on two indicators: 1) the number of children from 6 months 
to 6 years old who received supplementary nutrition and 2) the number of pregnant and 
lactating women who received supplementary nutrition. The number of beneficiaries at 
the national-level for each quarter was calculated by adding the number of beneficiaries 
for all States and UTs.
Service disruption and restoration using MPR data were defined and calculated using 
the approach adopted for HMIS data. Table 3 provides the details on definitions and 
formulae used.
Table 3: Service disruption and restoration definition and formulae
Indicator Definition and formula
Service disruptionPercentage of beneficiaries receiving service during lockdown i.e., 
between April-June 2020 (T1) compared with the pre-pandemic period 
i.e. between October–December 2019 (T0)
Early restorationPercentage of beneficiaries receiving service between July-September 
2020 (T2) compared with the pre-pandemic period i.e., October-
December 2019 (T0)
RestorationPercentage of beneficiaries receiving service between October-
December 2020 (T3) compared with the pre-pandemic period i.e., 
October-December 2019 (T0)
Health Management Information System
India’s HMIS  provides monthly information on the operational status of health services 
and platforms at the district-, state-, and national-levels. We examined the coverage of 
key health and nutrition services between October 2019 and December 2020 using HMIS 
data (Accessed on June 17, 2021 from https:/ /hmis.nhp.gov.in/#!/standardReports ).
The following coverage indicators available in the HMIS database that pertained to 
POSHAN Abhiyaan interventions during the first 1,000 days were included in the analysis: 
1) Number of pregnant women given 180 IFA tablets; 2) Number of pregnant women 
received 4 or more ANC check-ups ; 3) Number of institutional deliveries conducted 
(including C-Sections); 4) Women receiving 1st post-partum checkup between 48 hours 
and 14 days; 5) Number of newborns received 6 home-based newborn care (HBNC) 
Methodology
19
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
visits after institutional delivery; 6) Number of children aged between 9 and 11 months 
who received full immunisation; 7) Number of severely underweight children provided 
health check-up (0-5 years). The number of beneficiaries for a quarter were calculated 
by adding the number of beneficiaries for each month in that quarter. Similarly, the 
number of beneficiaries at the national level were computed by adding the number of 
beneficiaries for all States and UTs.
2.5.3 Analysis of policy guidelines during COVID-19
State-level policy guidance from March to October 2020 was assessed using the available 
State policy documents in the POSHAN COVID-19 Monitoring Report  for 13 States (Andhra 
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal).
2.5.4 Analysis of data from States on innovations during COVID-19
Data on State-level service delivery adaptations and innovations during the COVID-19 
pandemic were collected in the State templates shared by NITI Aayog (Annexure 1A and 
1B), and analysed.
2.6 LIMITATIONS
One limitation is inconsistent reporting and missing data across various indicators 
between States and UTs. For instance, no data were available from West Bengal; thus, 
West Bengal was excluded from the analysis. Moreover, as this report presents partial  
data received from States and UTs, the overall progress scores for certain States and 
UTs appear relatively low, which may not appropriately represent the State- or UT-level 
progress on POSHAN Abhiyaan implementation.
In addition, some States and UTs provided information from other publicly available data 
sources as opposed to internal monitoring systems. Similarly, some States and UTs used 
inconsistent data sources for a similar set of indicators.
POSHAN Abhiyaan and its implementation have been rolled out in phases in the country. 
The availability of funds, supplies, ICDS-Common Application Software roll-out, training 
and capacity building and other related indicators are dependent on the roll-out of the 
Abhiyaan in the States/UTs. However, in preparing this report, this differentiation of the 
phased roll-out was not accounted for.
Lastly, although the WCD and Health templates were designed to collect a comprehensive 
set of information on various topics, responses to questions that were integral to the 
scoring framework/rubric were prioritized during the data collection and validation 
process with States/UTs.
20
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Methodology3What progress 
have we made 
to date?
This chapter examines progress on delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan and on nutrition in India 
more broadly. The POSHAN Abhiyaan Monitoring Framework2 reinforces the importance 
of assessing the progress on programme preparedness and coverage of interventions 
after launching the programme. Therefore, in examining progress on POSHAN Abhiyaan, 
the team retains a focus on system readiness and aspects of programme coverage as 
these were lingering areas of challenge identified in the previous progress report and 
since programme coverage has been disrupted due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
3.1  WHAT PROGRESS HAVE STATES MADE ON DELIVERING 
POSHAN ABHIYAAN?
To assess the implementation progress in all States and UTs, data were collected using 
semi-structured questionnaires (Annexure 1A & 1B) from the State/UT WCD and Health 
Departments on four key themes related to the inputs and activities under POSHAN 
Abhiyaan for March 2020. These include:
1. Governance and institutional mechanisms
2. Strategy and planning
3. Service delivery and capacities
4. Programme activities and intervention coverage
Chapter 2 described the process of data collection, compilation, and computation of 
scores. This chapter presents the progress on system capabilities and some areas of 
implementation of POSHAN Abhiyaan. All results present findings separately for the 19 
large states, eight small states, and seven UTs.
In terms of overall implementation in States and UTs (Figure 5), Maharashtra, Andhra 
Pradesh and Gujarat had the highest achievements, followed by Tamil Nadu, Madhya 
Pradesh, and Himachal Pradesh. Twelve out of 19 large States had an implementation 
score of over 70%. Among the eight small States, Sikkim was the highest performer in 
21
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
overall implementation (more than 75%), followed by Meghalaya, Tripura and Goa. Dadar 
and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu, Chandigarh, and Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
were ranked the top three UTs, which scored over 70%. Since some States and UTs have 
incomplete data, it is difficult to comment on the States and UTs that were the lowest 
performers.
Figure 5: Overall implementation status of POSHAN Abhiyaan* at the national-level in 2020
Maximum Score: 100
*Based on calculated scores from State Template Data
3.1.1 Monitoring progress on inputs
Programme inputs related to the ICDS and Health platforms are critical for functioning 
of POSHAN Abhiyaan pillars. These include funding, HR, supplies and infrastructure, 
which have been categorized under key themes: governance and institutional mechanism, 
strategy and planning, and service delivery and capacity.
3.1.1.1 Governance and institutional mechanism
This theme captures two critical components pertaining to governance and institutional 
mechanisms, as envisaged under POSHAN Abhiyaan:
1. Fund utilization by States/UTs
2. Constitution of committees and resource groups to develop and follow CAP
Fund utilization is an essential component of POSHAN Abhiyaan, which is an interface to 
initiate effective implementation. Another crucial institutional mechanism is a convergent 
approach to ensure targeted approach to reduce malnutrition. MoWCD recognized the 
need for actions of multiple agencies to address malnutrition, and therefore strong 
22
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
What progress have we made to date?convergence of services on-the-ground was emphasised in the guidelines for POSHAN 
Abhiyaan. It is of utmost importance to ensure that different inter-related schemes move 
from their silos to a unified and convergent action. For this, convergence committees 
were envisaged at the State-, District-, and Block-levels, including State Resource Group 
(SRG), District Resource Groups (DRG) and Block Resource Groups (BRG) to develop 
and follow CAPs. Hence, information on fund utilization, formation of CAP committees 
at the Block- and District-level was collected under this head.
On governance and institutional mechanism, the maximum score given to a State/UT is 
12. Encouragingly, the utilization of funds and the constitution of resource groups and 
committees improved. As a result, States and UTs have scored high on this theme.
 ÂLarge States: Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Maharashtra, and Tamil Nadu 
scored the highest (11 out of 12 points), while Assam scored the lowest (1) among 
all the States due to low formation of committees. Remaining 11 States scored 
10 points.
 ÂSmall States: Meghalaya and Nagaland scored the maximum score of 12 point, 
while Mizoram and Sikkim scored 11, and Arunachal Pradesh and Tripura scored 
9. Complete data for Goa and Manipur were not available.
 ÂUnion Territories: Four out of the eight UTs including Lakshadweep, Chandigarh, 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu and Jammu and Kashmir scored 10 or 
more points. Puducherry scored lowest points (7). Complete data for Andaman 
and Nicobar Island and Delhi were not available, whereas Ladakh received funds 
from the central share of Jammu Kashmir.
Figure 6: State-wise scores for Government and Institutional Mechanism
Maximum score: 12
Based on State Template Data
What progress have we made to date?
23
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Insights from National- and State-level key findings on the two subthemes of governance 
and institutional mechanisms are as follows:
a. Fund Utilization by States/UTs
All States/UTs have received funds from the Centre except Ladakh, which received a 
portion of central funds of Jammu and Kashmir.
National-level key findings:
Around 40% of the total funds released under POSHAN Abhiyaan have been utilized 
by States/UTs till 31st March, 2020. There has been an increase in both the utilization of 
funds and the number of states that had utilized more than 50% of the funds from the 
end of FY 2018-19 to the end of FY 2019-20 (Table 4).
Table 4: Utilization of funds: Comparison between FY 2017-18 to 2018-19 and 
FY 2017-18 to FY 2019-20
IndicatorFY 2017-18 to FY 
2018-19FY 2017-18 to FY 
2019-20
% of funds utilized 17% 40%
Number of States that have utilized more 
than 50% of the total funds released3 12
State-level key findings:
By the end of FY 2019-20, Nagaland (87%), Meghalaya (78%), Sikkim (71%), Mizoram (67%) 
and Lakshadweep (65%) were utilizing maximum funds, while Punjab (22%), Puducherry 
(22%), Tripura (16%), Arunachal Pradesh (9%) and Odisha (8%) utilized the lowest amount 
of funds released. (Annexure 6-A).
Among the large States, fund utilization was highest in Kerala (58%) and lowest in Odisha 
(8%). Among small States, fund utilization was highest in Nagaland (87%) and lowest in 
Arunachal Pradesh (9%); and among UTs, fund utilization was highest in Lakshadweep 
(65%) and lowest in Puducherry (22%) by the end of FY 2019-20.
Comparing FY 2017-18 to FY 2018-19, while the percent fund utilization improved in 
most (30 out of 35) States/UTs, the percent of fund utilization declined in 5 States/UTs 
(Telangana, Mizoram, Daman and Diu and Dadar and Nagar Haveli, and Puducherry) 
(Figure 7).
An evaluation of centrally-sponsored schemes conducted by DMEO, NITI Aayog shows 
that fund utilization is high on community-based events and IEC materials, but low for 
procurement of devices.3
3 Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DEMO), NITI Aayog, 2020
24
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
What progress have we made to date?Figure 7: State-wise comparison of the Percentage Funds utilized up to FY 2018-19 and FY 
2017-18 and up to FY 2019-20
Note: Ladakh was excluded because Jammu Kashmir gave a proportion of their central funds to Ladakh after 
the UT was formed. Due to this, no separate Central Funds were allocated to this Union Territory.
b. Constitution of Committees and Resource Groups
National-level key findings:
By March 2020, DRGs had been formed in 94% of the districts and BRGs had been formed 
in 96% of the blocks. Compared with the end of March 2019, there was an increase in 
the districts with DRGs by 7 percentage points and Blocks with BRGs by 18 percentage 
points (Figure 8). Additionally, the percentage of districts where CAP Committees have 
been formed also increased by 7 percentage points from 2019 to 2020.
Figure 8: Constitution of committees: Comparison between 2019 and 2020
Note: 
To calculate the national estimate, mean of States/UT available in both rounds was computed (excluded Odisha 
and Ladakh from 2020 national estimate to keep States & UTs common).
For estimating cumulative % for D&N & D&D for the year 2019, mean of both UTs has been calculated & used.
What progress have we made to date?
25
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
State-level key findings
Most States/UTs had constituted DRGs, BRGs and CAP committees. It is to be noted 
that DRGs were formed in all districts in all States/UTs except for Delhi, Puducherry, 
Assam and Ladakh. Similarly, BRGs were formed in all blocks in all States/UTs except 
for Tripura, Meghalaya, Assam and Ladakh. All States/UTs had 100% districts with CAP 
committees, except Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Puducherry, Assam and Goa (Annexure 6-A). 
Complete information for the constitution of committees was not available for Goa, 
Manipur, Andaman and Nicobar Island and Delhi.
The constitution of DRGs, BRGs, and CAP committees has improved at the national- 
and state- level. However, there is also a need to ensure that these resource groups 
and committees plan interventions in a way that the interventions do reach intended 
beneficiaries.
3.1.1.2 Strategy and planning
This theme examined the elements of cross-sectoral convergence and included two 
indicators:
1. Whether the State/UT CAP has been submitted to the Central Project 
Management Unit (CPMU) for the year 2020-21
2. Proportion of Districts that developed and submitted the CAP for the year 
2020-21
National level key findings
CAPs are paramount to map the way forward for multi-sectoral convergence; therefore, it 
is noteworthy that around 83% of districts had developed and submitted CAP for 2020-
21. The percentage of districts that had developed and submitted CAP in FY 2020-21 
improved by 13 percentage points compared with FY 2019-20 (Figure 9).
Figure 9: Percentage of districts that have developed and submitted CAP for FY 2019-20 
compared to FY 2020-21 at the national level
Note:
To calculate the national estimate, mean of States/UT available in both rounds was computed (excluded 
Odisha and Ladakh from 2020 national estimate to keep States & UTs common).
For estimating cumulative % for D&N & D&D for the year 2019, mean of both UTs has been calculated & 
used.
26
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
What progress have we made to date?State-level key findings
Although the overall number of States that had developed and submitted CAP has 
improved, certain States and UTs have very few districts that have submitted CAP. 
Additionally, the field surveys conducted in 13 States/UTs indicates that, although majority 
of States/UTs had prepared and submitted CAPs, it is still not clear what actions usually 
result from the monitoring and review of the CAPs3.
Figure 10: State-wise scores for strategy and planning
Max score: 3
Based on State Template Data
 ÂLarge States: 15 out of 19 States had submitted CAP to CPMU FY for 2020-21, 
whereas Kerala, Maharashtra, Odisha and Punjab had not submitted CAP yet. 
These four States had lower scores because they did not submit CAP.
 ÂAdditionally, 13 States had 100% districts that developed and submitted CAP 
for FY 2020-21. Uttrakhand and Assam had the least number of districts that 
developed and submitted CAP due to which they scored 1.5 out of 3. On a 
positive note, 12 States scored maximum possible score.
 ÂSmall States: All small States submitted CAP to CPMU for FY 2020-21. Information 
was not available for Manipur and Delhi. Additionally, most small states (6 out of 
8) had 100% districts that developed and submitted CAP for FY 2020-21. Goa 
scored the lowest because none of its districts developed and submitted CAP.
 ÂUnion Territories:  All UTs except Dadar and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu, 
and Jammu and Kashmir submitted CAP to CPMU for FY 2020-21. There were 5 
UTs where all districts developed and submitted CAP for FY 2020-21, while the 
number of districts is very low in Andaman and Nicobar Island and Puducherry.
Annexure 6-B lists the States and UTs where all districts have developed and submitted 
CAP for FY 2020-21.
What progress have we made to date?
27
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
3.1.1.3 Inputs for service delivery & capacity
The categories covered under this theme included human resources, infrastructure, 
supplies, training, and capacity building. Annexure 2 provides a detailed list of indicators 
that were considered for each of these categories. These inputs are necessary for ensuring 
delivery of services with adequate coverage, continuity, intensity and quality (C2IQ).
Departments of Women and Child Development
The sub-themes covered human resources, supplies and training and capacity of the staff. 
Since human resources are critical for programme implementation, information on the 
percentage of filled positions for the posts of Joint Project Coordinator, Consultant and 
Project Associate under POSHAN Abhiyaan was collected across States.
In terms of supplies, data on distribution of mobile phones and growth monitoring devices, 
including weighing scales for infants and adults and height measuring instruments (e.g. 
infantometers and stadiometers), were collected for monitoring the supplies under 
DWCD. Supply of mobile phones and growth monitoring devices are an important input 
especially for roll-out of ICDS-CAS, and for conducting growth monitoring activities at 
the Anganwadi Centres. Therefore, adequate supplies are important both for providing 
services and for monitoring the coverage of the services.
Lastly, as capacity building of human resources is an integral step for ensuring high quality 
services, this report emphasises assessing the percentage of trained professionals. For 
assessing this, the percentage of Lady Supervisors and Anganwadi workers trained on 
e-ILA, and child development project officers (CDPOs) and lady supervisors trained on 
dashboard/mobile was collected.
As per the score rubric, the maximum score that can be assigned under the service 
delivery and capacity theme is 23 points. In six States and UTs, data were not available 
for all the indicators under this theme.
 ÂLarge States: 16 States had data for all indicators, out of which Gujarat, Tamil 
Nadu and Andhra Pradesh scored between 22-23 points, whereas Haryana 
scored 7 points. Complete information was not available for Madhya Pradesh, 
Odisha and Punjab.
 ÂSmall States: Meghalaya and Sikkim scored 19 points, whereas Arunachal Pradesh 
scored only 4 points out of the maximum possible score of 23 points. Complete 
information was not available for Arunachal Pradesh and Manipur.
 ÂUnion Territories: Chandigarh and Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu 
scored the maximum score (23), followed by Andaman & Nicobar (22), whereas 
Puducherry scored only 7 points. Complete information was not available for 
Ladakh.
28
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
What progress have we made to date?Figure 11: State-wise scores for Inputs for service delivery and capacity: Women 
and Child Development Department
Max score: 23
Based on State Template Data
Insights from national- and state-level key findings on the three sub-themes of inputs for 
service delivery for WCD are as follows:
a. Human Resources
State-level key findings:
 ÂJoint Project Coordinator: 12 large States (Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, 
Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttarakhand), 4 small States (Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Sikkim), and 4 UTs (Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar Haveli and Daman & 
Diu, Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir) had filled 100% positions. While 9 States/UTs had 
less than 25% positions filled (Annexure 6-C).
 ÂConsultants: 7 large States (Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya 
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Telangana), one small State (Mizoram), and 3 UTs (Andaman 
& Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu) had filled 
100% of the positions. While 10 States/UTs had less than 25% positions filled 
(Annexure 6-C).
 ÂProject Associate:  10 large States (Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, 
Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Telangana, Uttarakhand), 
4 small States (Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim), and 4 UTs (Andaman 
& Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, 
Lakshadweep) had filled 100% of the positions. While 9 States/UTs had less 
than 25% positions filled (Annexure 6-C).
What progress have we made to date?
29
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
States/UTs—namely Punjab (0%), Goa (0%), Tripura (0%), Puducherry (0%), Odisha (33% 
of Joint Project Coordinator; 0% of Consultants and Project Associates), Uttar Pradesh 
(29% of Joint Project Coordinator; 0% of Consultants and Project Associates), Arunachal 
Pradesh (60% of Consultants; 0% of Joint Project Coordinator and Project Associates), 
and Jammu and Kashmir (100% of Joint Project Coordinator; 0% of Consultants and 
Project Associates) had least positions filled due to which they scored lower than other 
States. Annexure 6-C lists the States and UTs with the highest and lowest HR positions 
filled. Data for Manipur and Ladakh were not available.
b. Supplies
National-level key findings :
Data were analysed on the district-level distribution of supplies nationwide. In March 2020, 
71% of mobile phones, 77% of infant weighing scales, 79% of adult weighing scales, 82% 
of infantometers and 80% of stadiometers were distributed to the districts. Compared 
with 2019, the distribution of supplies had increased significantly (Figure 12).
Figure 12: Distribution of supplies to districts: Comparison between 2019 and 2020
Note:
To calculate the national estimate, mean of States/UTs available in both rounds was computed (excluded 
Odisha and Ladakh from 2020 national estimate to keep States & UTs common).
For estimating cumulative % for D&N & D&D for the year 2019, mean of both UTs has been calculated & used.
State-level key findings:
 ÂLarge States : 8 States (Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand, 
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and Uttarakhand) had distributed 100% of mobile 
phones, and 10 States (Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Maharashtra, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Uttarakhand) had 
distributed 100% of growth monitoring devices. Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, 
Punjab and Odisha had not distributed any mobile phones. Supplies were lowest 
in Odisha (0% supplies) and Uttar Pradesh (31% mobile phones; 38% infant 
weighing scales; 39% adult weighing scales; 0% infantometers and stadiometers 
were distributed).
30
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
What progress have we made to date? ÂSmall States:  4 States (Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura) distributed 
100% of mobile phones, and 4 States (Goa, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland) 
had distributed 100% of growth monitoring devices. Supplies were lowest in 
Arunachal Pradesh (0% mobile phones, infant weighing scale, and adult weighing 
scale; 2% infantometers; 2% stadiometers were distributed) and Manipur (21% 
mobile phones; and 0% growth monitoring devices).
 ÂUnion Territories:  5 UTs (Andaman & Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman & Diu, Delhi and Ladakh) had distributed 100% of mobile 
phones, and all UTs had distributed all growth monitoring devices.
Annexure 6-C lists the States/UTs with highest and lowest distribution of supplies to the 
districts.
c. Training and Capacity Building
State-level key findings:
 ÂTraining on e-ILA: 7 Large States (Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, 
Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh), 3 Small States (Meghalaya, 
Sikkim and Tripura), and 4 UTs (Andaman & Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, Dadar 
& Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, Jammu & Kashmir) had trained 100% LS, while 
5 large States (Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh), 1 
small State (Sikkim), and 4 UTs (Andaman & Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, Dadar 
& Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, Jammu & Kashmir) had trained 100% AWW. 
In 15 States/UTs, no LS had completed training. Similarly, in 15 States/UTs, no 
AWWs had completed training.
 ÂTraining on Dashboard/Mobile phones: 5 Large States (Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, 
Gujarat, Kerala, Tamil Nadu), 3 Small States (Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura), and 5 
UTs (Andaman & Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar Haveli and Daman 
& Diu, Delhi, Lakshadweep) had trained 100% CDPOs, while 6 large States, 3 
small States, and 4 UTs had trained 100% LS. In 9 States/UTs, no CDPOs had 
completed training. Similarly, in 8 States/UTs, no LS had completed training.
Complete information on training was not available for Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Punjab, 
Arunachal Pradesh and Manipur.
Only a few States/UTs had trained adequate staff, while there are States/UTs like Assam, 
Haryana, and Karnataka where no staff had been trained on e-ILA and Dashboard/mobile 
phones (Annexure 6-C). According to interviews held with State Officials under ICDS, 
gaps in training continue to exist due to low basic educational background and comfort 
levels in using technology among AWWs, especially among older AWWs3.
The percentage of CDPOs trained on ICDS Dashboard/Mobile nearly doubled, from 30% 
in 2019 to 59% in 2020 (Figure 13). Complete information for Manipur, Madhya Pradesh, 
Odisha, Punjab and Arunachal Pradesh was not available.
What progress have we made to date?
31
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Figure 13: Percentage of CDPOs trained on ICDS Dashboard/Mobile Phones: Comparison 
between 2019 and 2020
Note:
To calculate the national estimate, mean of States/UT available in both rounds was computed (excluded Odisha 
and Ladakh from 2020 national estimate to keep States & UTs common).
For estimating cumulative % for D&N & D&D for the year 2019, mean of both UTs has been calculated & used.
As per the Women and Child Development Dashboard  (accessed on 27 May 2021), 
Ministry of Women and Child Development, as on 11 September 2020, ICDS-CAS had 
been rolled out in 29 States with 359 districts of the country. While all districts had been 
covered under ICDS-CAS in 16 States and UTs, significant proportions of districts had not 
been covered in Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. 
Additionally, nearly half (48%) of Anganwadi Workers had received smartphones and 56% 
Lady Supervisors had received smartphones as on September 2020.4
Although the procurement of smartphones by staff and the distribution of mobile phones 
to the districts have improved, a field survey conducted as a part of an evaluation of 
centrally-sponsored schemes of WCD3 found that the ICDS-CAS had faced numerous 
challenges. First, roll out of ICDS-CAS remained slow due to network issues in many 
districts. Second, the qualitative survey conducted for 119 AWWs (DEMO) indicates that 
most AWWs using mobile/tablets continue to maintain records manually, which led to 
duplication of work. The challenges pertaining to ICDS-CAS made it an inefficient model, 
leading the ICDS-CAS to be replaced by the POSHAN Tracker, which must be rolled out 
completely and duplication of record keeping must be avoided to save time and enhance 
the effectiveness of AWWs.
Overall, the scores indicate that several States/UTs need to strengthen the delivery system 
for effective service delivery – mostly by improving training and capacity building. To 
continue progress on POSHAN Abhiyaan, gaps in human resource positions must be 
closed, and most urgently in States where <25% of the required positions are filled. There 
is also a need to close the supply gaps in some States. In addition, there are large gaps in 
staff training on e-ILA modules across several States. There is an urgent need to identify 
the reasons for such gaps in training and address them.
4 Women and Child Development Dashboard, MOWCD, https:/ /wcd.dashboard.nic.in/ (accessed on 27 May 
2021)
32
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
What progress have we made to date?Departments of Health and Family Welfare
To examine health-related service delivery and capacity, infrastructure and HR domains 
were assessed. Information was available for all States and UTs except Mizoram.
The percentage of sanctioned health facilities, including functional sub-centres, community 
health centres (CHCs), and health and wellness centres (HWCs), were collected from States 
and UTs. These health facilities are a one-stop shop for essential child and maternal health 
services; thus, it is extremely important for States and UTs to have as many functional 
health facilities as sanctioned. In terms of human resources, the percentage of auxiliary 
nurse midwife (ANM) positions filled was collected from States and UTs.
As per the rubric, a maximum of 12 points was allotted to service delivery, 3 points for 
HR and 9 points for Infrastructure. Most States/UTs scored well on functional sub-centres 
and CHCs, but low on functional HWCs.
 ÂLarge States: Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka and Kerala scored the highest 
possible score of 12 points, and 14 other states scored between 9 and 11 points. 
Bihar scored the lowest (6) due to the low number of functional health facilities 
and low ANM positions filled. Complete information was not available for Punjab.
 ÂSmall States:  Goa scored 12 points, while the others scored between 9 and 11 
points. Arunachal Pradesh scored low due to the low number of functional health 
facilities. Complete information was not available for Mizoram.
 ÂUnion Territories:  Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu scored the highest 
possible score (12), whereas Delhi and Chandigarh scored 9 points. Complete 
information was not available for Chandigarh and Delhi.
Figure 14: State-wise scores for inputs for service delivery essentials: Health Department
Maximum score: 12
Based on State Template Data
What progress have we made to date?
33
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Insights from National- and State-level key findings on the two subthemes of inputs for 
service delivery for Health are as follows:
a. Infrastructure
State-level key findings:
 ÂLarge States: 13 States (Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, 
Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand) had 100% functional sub-centres, 14 States 
(Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand) had 100% functional CHCs, and 3 States (Andhra Pradesh, 
Kerala and Punjab) had 100% functional HWCs. Bihar had the lowest number of 
functional health facilities (60% of sub-centres, 43% of CHCs and 30% of HWCs).
 ÂSmall States: 2 States (Goa and Sikkim) had 100% functional sub-centres, 4 
States (Goa, Manipur, Meghalaya and Sikkim) had 100% functional CHCs, and 
2 States (Goa and Nagaland) had 100% functional HWCs. The results indicate 
that Arunachal Pradesh (63% of sub-centres and 39% of HWCs) and Nagaland 
(76% of sub-centres and 64% of CHCs were functional) should focus more on 
infrastructure. Information regarding the health infrastructure was not available 
for Mizoram.
 ÂUnion Territories: 6 UTs (Andaman & Nicobar Island, Dadar & Nagar Haveli 
and Daman & Diu, Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, Puducherry) had 100% 
functional sub-centres, 8 UTs (Andaman & Nicobar Island, Chandigarh Dadar & 
Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, 
Puducherry) had 100% functional CHCs and 3 UTs (Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman & Diu, Lakshadweep) had 100% functional HWCs. Complete 
information on health infrastructure was not available for Chandigarh and Delhi.
In total, most States had more than 75% functional sub-centres and CHCs, while number 
of functional HWCs are lower compared to other health facilities. Annexure 6-D lists the 
States/UTs with the highest and lowest number of functional health facilities.
Additionally, the percentage of functional sub-centres increased slightly, from 92% in 
2019 to 94% in 2020. However, the percentage of functional CHCs decreased marginally, 
from 97% in 2019 to 95% in 2020 (Figure 15). The number of sanctioned CHCs have 
increased for many States and UTs in 2020, which contributed to an overall reduction in 
the percentage of functional CHCs in 2020 compared with the previous year.
34
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
What progress have we made to date?Figure 15: Percentage of functional health facilities: Comparison between 2019 and 2020
Note:
To calculate the national estimate, mean of States/UT available in both rounds was computed (excluded 
Odisha and Ladakh from 2020 national estimate to keep States & UTs common).
For estimating cumulative % for D&N & D&D for the year 2019, the mean of both UTs has been calculated 
and used.
b. Human Resources
National level key finding:
According to the State-level data collected, 87% of ANM positions were filled in 2020, 
which is slightly higher than 85% in 2019 (Figure 16).
Figure 16: Percentage of ANM positions filled: Comparison between 2019 and 2020
Note:
To calculate the national estimate, mean of States/UT available in both rounds was computed (excluded 
Odisha and Ladakh from 2020 national estimate to keep States & UTs common).
For estimating cumulative % for D&N & D&D for the year 2019, mean of both UTs has been calculated & 
used.
State-level key findings:
 ÂLarge States: 15 States have filled more than 75% of the ANM positions, whereas 
the data for Punjab were not available. Odisha filled 100% of its ANM positions, 
Bihar (52%), Uttar Pradesh (61%), and Himachal Pradesh (71%) had filled less than 
75% of ANM positions. Information on ANM positions filled was not available 
for Punjab.
 ÂSmall States: 6 States (Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland 
and Sikkim) have filled more than 75% of the ANM positions, whereas the data 
for Mizoram were not available. Tripura (56%) had filled less than 75% of ANM 
positions. Information on ANM positions filled was not available for Mizoram.
 ÂUnion Territories:  All UTs have filled more than 75% of the ANM positions.
What progress have we made to date?
35
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
States like Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Tripura and Bihar had the least ANM 
positions filled (Annexure 6-D). Therefore, there is an urgent need to close the gap in 
ANM vacancies in these States, as they are a critical work force for delivering a range of 
maternal health interventions.
3.1.2  Monitoring progress on programme activities and 
intervention coverage
To assess the progress of States and UTs on programme activities and intervention 
coverage, data from the WCD Departments on select ICDS activities as well as data from 
the Health Departments on a set of interventions were analysed. Annexure 2 provides a 
detailed list of indicators that were considered for calculating the scores.
Departments of Women and Child Development
Activities such as Take-Home Ration and weighing of children aged 0-5 years were 
selected for assessing the progress of ICDS activities. The data was collected from the 
States and UTs through the State Template shared with them. Data received for the 
month of March 2020 in state-filled information was checked for concordance with the 
MPR data from MoWCD. Annexure 5 presents the concordance check findings.
As per the rubric, a maximum of 12 points were allotted to programme activities and 
intervention coverage of WCD.
 ÂLarge States: 15 States had complete information, among which 8 States had 
the maximum possible score of 12, while Bihar had the lowest score (6 points). 
Complete information was not available for Assam, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh 
and Uttarakhand.
 ÂSmall States:  Out of 5 small States for which complete information was available, 
Goa, Sikkim and Tripura scored the highest (12 points). Complete information 
was not available for Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Nagaland.
 ÂUnion Territories:  Among the UTs, 5 UTs scored 12, whereas Jammu and Kashmir 
scored only 7.
Figure 17: State-wise scores for programme activities and intervention coverage – 
Women and Child Development Department
Maximum Score: 12  Based on State Template Data
36
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
What progress have we made to date?State-level key findings:
 ÂLarge States: 7 States (Gujarat, Jharkhand, Kerala, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan, 
Tamil Nadu) had distributed THR to 100% pregnant women registered at AWC, 5 
States (Jharkhand, Kerala, Maharashtra, Odisha and Tamil Nadu) had distributed 
THR to 100% of lactating women registered at AWCs, and 6 States (Jharkhand, 
Kerala, Maharashtra, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh) had distributed 
THR to 100% of children 6-36 months of age registered at AWCs. Large States 
with the lowest THR coverage included Bihar (65% of pregnant women, 62% of 
lactating women and 52% 0f children), Haryana (63% of pregnant women, 63% 
of lactating women, and 59% of children) and Punjab (78% of pregnant women, 
76% of lactating women, and 65% of children).
Additionally, in 10 States (Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab and  Tamil Nadu) more 
than 75% of children 0-5 years of age who were weighed, while Bihar and Kerala 
had less than 20% children who were weighed. (Annexure 6-E)
 ÂSmall States:  3 States (Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura) had distributed THR 
to 100% of pregnant women registered at AWCs, 4 States (Goa, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram and Tripura) had distributed THR to 100% of lactating women registered 
at AWCs, and 3 States (Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura) had distributed THR 
to 100% of children 6-36 months of age registered at AWCs. While Sikkim 
(84% pregnant women, 84% lactating women and 77% children) had the lowest 
coverage of THR. Additionally, 3 States (Goa, Sikkim and Tripura) had more than 
75% of children aged 0-5 who were weighed, whereas Arunachal Pradesh had 
less than 25% children who were weighed.
 ÂUTs: 6 UTs (Andaman & Nicobar Island, Dadar & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, 
Delhi, Ladakh, Lakshadweep and Puducherry) had distributed THR to 100% of 
pregnant women registered at AWCs, 5 UTs (Andaman & Nicobar Island, Delhi, 
Ladakh, Lakshadweep and Puducherry) had distributed THR to 100% of lactating 
women registered at AWCs, and 5 UTs (Andaman & Nicobar Island, Dadar & 
Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, Delhi, Ladakh, Lakshadweep) had distributed 
THR to 100% children 6-36 months of age registered at AWCs. Among UTs, 
the lowest THR coverage was in Jammu and Kashmir (49% pregnant women, 
51% lactating women, and 54% children). Additionally, 5 UTs (Andaman and 
Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, Dadar and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu, Delhi, 
Lakshadweep) had more than 75% of children aged 0-5 who were weighed, 
while Ladakh had less than 25% children who were weighed.
It is imperative to examine the reasons for low coverage of THR and growth monitoring. 
States and UTs should assess whether the gaps in THR coverage pertain to supply chain 
issues or are a result of demand-side challenges. For growth monitoring, States should 
review if there are gaps in staff training on measuring children, availability of supplies or 
in community awareness to avail the service, and identify appropriate solutions.
What progress have we made to date?
37
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Departments of Health and Family Welfare
Using data on immediate determinants, coverage of ANC, postnatal care, and early 
childhood interventions, and supplies from the State Health Departments, 14 indicators 
were constructed to assess State/UTs progress on intervention delivery. Among 
Programme Activities and Intervention coverage, indicators were divided into following 
sub-themes:
1. Programme Activities
2. Anaemia Mukt Bharat Strategy
The data was collected from the States and UTs through the State Template shared with 
them. Data received for the month of March 2020 in state-filled information was checked 
for concordance with the HMIS data from MoHFW was done on indicators that were 
comparable. Annexure 5 presents the findings from the concordance check.
Based on the progress on programme activities and implementation of the AMB strategy, 
States and UTs were ranked on a scale of 38 points. The overall scores are low due 
to indicators like children receiving 8-10 doses of IFA syrup, IFA received by lactating 
women, pregnant women who received Albendazole tablet after first trimester, and 
procurement of haemoglobin meter. Scores were also low for children receiving weekly 
IFA and conducting home visits for pregnant women amid COVID-19 in March 2020.
 ÂLarge States: Information was available on all the indicators for 10 States only, 
among which Maharashtra and Himachal scored the highest (32 points), whereas 
the remaining 8 States scored between 25 and 31 points. Complete information 
was not available for Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Odisha, 
Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh.
 ÂSmall States:  Of the 8 small States, 7 were missing information on at least one 
indicator. Sikkim was the only small state with complete information and scored 
the highest (26 points). Mizoram provided no information on health programme 
activities.
 ÂUnion Territories:  Of 8 UTs, Chandigarh, Delhi and Lakshadweep did not have 
information on at least one indicator. Dadar and Nagar Haveli & Daman and 
Diu scored the highest (28 points), whereas the remaining four States scored 
between 20 and 26 points.
Insights from State-level key findings on the two sub-themes of coverage of programme 
activities for health are as follows:
a. Programme Activities
A total of 12 indicators were used to assess progress on health-related programme 
activities.
State-level key findings:
 ÂAmong all 34 States and UTs, 27 had more than 75% of newborns who were 
breastfed within one hour, whereas Rajasthan, Ladakh and Puducherry had less 
than 25%.
38
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
What progress have we made to date? ÂOnly 17 States and UTs had more than 75% of children 12-23 months of age who 
were fully immunised, while 11 states and UTs had less than 25% children who 
were fully immunised.
 ÂIn terms of children 6-59 months of age provided at least 8-10 doses of IFA 
syrup, only Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, and Puducherry covered more than 75% 
of children while as high as 23 States and UTs had less than 25% coverage.
 ÂOnly 13 states and UTs had more than 75% of pregnant women registered for 
ANC in the first trimester. 19 States had more than 75% of pregnant women who 
had 4 or more ANC visits. Punjab, Nagaland and Tripura had less than 25% of 
pregnant women attending 4 or more ANC visits.
 Â23 States and UTs had more than 75% of pregnant women who were given 180 
IFA tablets, while Punjab and Tripura had less than 25% coverage of IFA for 
pregnant women. On the other hand, 12 States and UTs had more than 75% of 
lactating women who were giving 180 IFA tablets, while 9 States and UTs had 
less than 25% coverage of IFA for lactating women.
Figure 18: State-wise scores for Programme activities and intervention coverage- 
Health Department
Maximum score: 38
 ÂThe percentage of children who were given weekly IFA tablets is low: only 6 
States and UTs had covered more than 75% of children, and coverage is less 
than 25% in 12 States and UTs.
 ÂIn terms of percentage of pregnant women given TT2/Boosters, 21 states had 
more than 75% coverage of TT2/Boosters, yet Punjab and Tripura had less than 
25% of pregnant women who were given TT2/boosters.
 ÂThe percentage of pregnant women who were given 1 Albendazole tablet after 
first trimester is low, as only 5 States and UTs had more than 75% coverage, 
while 10 States and UTs had less than 25% coverage.
What progress have we made to date?
39
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
 Â16 States and UTs had more than 75% of children (0-59 months) diarrhoea cases 
treated with ORS, while there were 5 States and UTs that treated less than 25% 
child diarrhoea cases with ORS.
 Â15 States and UTs reported more than 75% of home visits for pregnant mothers 
to counsel them on practices during pregnancy, whereas less than 25% of home 
visits for pregnant women were conducted in Madhya Pradesh and Arunachal 
Pradesh during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Many States and UTs were unable to provide information on all indicators, and information 
was not available for any indicator for Mizoram. Annexure 6-F lists the best and the worst 
performing States/UTs on the 14 programme activity indicators.
Overall, there is scope for improvement in coverage for interventions during the first 1,000 
days. Interventions like early initiation of breastfeeding, 180 days IFA received by pregnant 
women, and TT2/boosters received by pregnant women have acceptable coverage 
across States and UTs. Interventions like child immunisation (12-23 months), women who 
registered for ANC during the first trimester, women who attended 4 ANC visits, and 
reported diarrhoea cases that were treated with ORS had performed well in some States 
and UTs, but gaps still exist in Bihar, Jharkhand, Kerala, Punjab, Rajasthan, Telangana, 
Uttarakhand, north-east States and UTs. There is a need to focus on interventions like IFA 
syrup received by children (0-59 months), IFA received by lactating women and pregnant 
women who received albendazole tablet after first trimester, as many States have less 
than 25% coverage of these indicators.
b. AMB Strategy
Two indicators were used for assessing progress on the AMB strategy.
State-level key findings:
According to the data collected from the States and UTs, 27 States and UTs have included 
IFA in the Essential Drug List, while the process is underway in 7 States and UTs. The 
results show that 9 states have procured digital invasive haemoglobin meters, while the 
process is in progress in as many as 22 States and UTs. The process is yet to begin in 
Karnataka, Andaman and Nicobar Island, and Dadar and Nagar Haveli & Daman and Diu. 
Information was not available for Mizoram for both indicators.
3.2 CONCLUSION AND WAY FORWARD
This chapter assessed State progress on establishing a range of mechanisms to deliver 
all POSHAN Abhiyaan components (technology, behaviour change communications, 
capacity building and convergence).
Overall, there is mixed progress among States across multiple indicators on establishing 
mechanisms to implement POSHAN Abhiyaan, reinforcing the need to bridge gaps in 
many areas. The key findings and subsequent recommendations are as follows:
40
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
What progress have we made to date? ÂOverall, fund utilization is low, with less than 50% of funds utilised in 23 States 
and UTs. Thus, there is an immediate need to accelerate its use through channels 
like recruiting human resources, procurement of devices and conducting CBEs 
and IEC.
 ÂThe constitution of district and block-level convergence action plan committees 
is not uniform across all States and UTs. This has implications for preparation 
of convergence action plans, which is the roadmap for achieving convergence. 
As empirical evidence suggests that implementing interventions across sectors 
simultaneously reduce stunting5; therefore, formation of CAPs is of utmost 
importance.
 ÂMany States and UTs have also submitted CAP to CPMU, but there is a need 
to focus on operationalizing the plans in a way that the interventions across 
sectors reaches same beneficiaries. Outcome-oriented convergence on ground 
can also be facilitated by training the field level staff on sharing information and 
data among themselves.
 ÂState scores varied across the service delivery indicators including on HR, 
infrastructure, supplies, training and capacity building. To continue progress 
on POSHAN Abhiyaan, attention to state-specific challenges pertaining to 
insufficient human resources, supplies and infrastructure is required.
 ÂTo close the gaps on procurement of smartphones, the Anganwadi Workers 
(AWWs) can be incentivized for data entry on online application or providing 
monthly allowance for rental/usage for using their own devices, as an alternative.
 ÂIn addition, there are large gaps in staff training on e-ILA modules across several 
States, due to low attendance at training, unavailability of training materials, lack 
of trainers, and low educational background of AWWs2. Therefore States/UTs 
need to address these challenges.
 ÂAmong the many ICDS services, priority areas for capacity building include 
strengthening the quality of growth monitoring and home-based counselling.
 ÂStates and UTs had covered many beneficiaries for THR, yet gaps exist. Therefore, 
there is a need to assess whether the gaps in THR pertain to supply chain issues 
or demand-side challenges. To address supply-side challenges, de-centralized 
model and decentralized self-help group model can be explored. E-payments 
should also be introduced at every stage. To address demand-side challenges, 
PRI and self-help groups (SHGs) should be involved for community engagement 
and explaining benefits. Additionally, to increase nutritional status and reduce 
intra-household consumption, fortification of THR and differentiating the packets 
for pregnant and lactating women, and children is recommended. With the 
introduction of POSHAN Tracker, the tracker should be used to monitor the 
nutrition service delivery of THR through QR code-based check while distributing 
packets and maintaining inventory. The tracker should also be used to monitor 
food consumption and take concurrent feedback from beneficiaries.
5  Rajpal et. al 2020
What progress have we made to date?
41
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
 ÂProgramme activities conducted under Department of Health have a mixed 
performance across the States and UTs. There is low coverage of IFA 
supplementation across the life stages, due to which it requires special attention. 
Similar to Kerala, other States and UTs can also implement programmes where 
IFA is provided to the out-of-school children at the AWC. Additionally, there is a 
need to assess the challenges on the supply-side and demand-side to improve 
coverage, especially of IFA supplementation, Albendazole tablets during 
pregnancy, 4 ANC check-ups, and home visits for pregnant women.
 ÂA new institute called Jan Arogya Samiti (JAS) should be utilized to the fullest 
in ensuring the accountability in the services being provided at the HWCs, and 
for ensuring that the benefit reaches to all beneficiaries.
 ÂThere is a need to strive for data management at the State and the UT level in 
order to track their standing with respect to the objective of the Abhiyaan as 
well as to enable inter-state comparison on performances.
These conclusions resonate with the Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office 
(DMEO) of NITI Aayog’s earlier independent evaluation which identified challenges 
of low fund utilisation, high numbers of staff vacancies limiting effective programme 
implementation as well as implementation of training and mentoring of frontline workers3.
42
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
What progress have we made to date?4Jan Andolan and 
Multi-Sectoral 
Interventions
4.1 BACKGROUND
POSHAN Abhiyaan aims to reduce stunting, anaemia and low birthweight in districts with 
a high burden of malnutrition. It recognizes the need for convergence and coordination 
such that the benefits of government schemes and programmes reach women and 
children in the first 1,000 days. The POSHAN Abhiyaan identifies targeted determinants 
of nutritional outcomes that exist in various schemes and programmes. These include 
maternal nutrition, newborn care practices, infant feeding and care practices and 
underlying determinants, such as age at marriage, age at first birth and sanitation.
To eliminate malnutrition from India, implementing a package of interventions with 
adequate coverage, continuity, intensity and quality must be ensured. To this end, POSHAN 
Abhiyaan was scaled up based on several key pillars, including technology, improving 
capacities, convergence of multiple programmes and behaviour change communication. 
These pillars were introduced to trigger a series of changes that improve nutrition 
interventions in the ICDS and health systems, address the immediate and underlying 
determinants of poor nutritional outcomes, and help improve outcomes such as child 
growth, lower anaemia and other targets of the nutrition mission.
This chapter presents the community involvement in POSHAN Abhiyaan through Jan 
Andolan 2020, and highlights the multi-sectoral steps taken by various Line Ministries 
for POSHAN Abhiyaan in FY 2019-2020.
4.2 JAN ANDOLAN
The Honourable Prime Minister intended that the POSHAN Abhiyaan be converted into 
a Jan Andolan for effective outreach and implementation. The Mission strives to prevent 
and reduce undernutrition, LBW, and stunting across the life cycle as early as possible, 
especially in the first three years of life, with interventions up to six years of age. Several 
programmes across Ministries and Departments have been contributing to tackling 
43
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
malnutrition and anaemia in the country. POSHAN Abhiyaan seeks to synergise all these 
efforts to achieve the desired goals and intends to raise community-level awareness into 
a Jan Andolan.
Objectives: Jan Andolan aims to achieve the following objectives:
 ÂRaise awareness on the impact of malnutrition across sectors and, in turn, create 
a ‘call to action’ for each sector to contribute towards reducing malnutrition;
 ÂMobilise multiple sectors and communities to consume more nutrient-rich food; 
and
 ÂPromote knowledge, attitudes and behaviours that support optimal breastfeeding, 
complementary feeding, maternal nutrition and adolescent nutrition to prevent 
malnutrition, including severe acute malnutrition (SAM) and anaemia.
4.2.1 Poshan Maah
In September 2020, Poshan Maah demonstrated the power of convergent outreach, 
garnering a gross participation of 379 crore participants across 14 crore activities 
nationwide. As many as 102 crore men, 128 crore women, and 118 crore children (males 
and females) were reached through Poshan Maah-related activities. However, it may be 
noted that this participation consists of repeat and recurrent participants, and should 
not be treated as absolute number of participants.
Despite the COVID-19 pandemic, there was tremendous enthusiasm and impressive 
participation in various activities were observed across the country. Considering the 
current pandemic, various activities were conducted through digital platforms for 
celebrating the Poshan Maah. Social Media, online activities, podcasts, e-Samvaad, and 
multiple webinar series were the most extensively used platforms.
Compared with Poshan Maah 2019, participation increased by 51% and the number of 
activities conducted by 284%, indicating an impressive rise in outreach and engagement 
associated with Poshan Maah 2020.
The States with the most activities conducted and highest participation levels in Poshan 
Maah 2020 are Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Karnataka and 
Madhya Pradesh.
44
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Jan Andolan and Multi-Sectoral InterventionsPOSHAN MAAH (SEPTEMBER 2020)
National Participation 
379,64,93,044 
Adult Participation
MALE:1,02,11,20,479 FEMALE: 1,28,24,03,552
Children Participation
MALE: 59,45,47,561 FEMALE: 62,41,78,371Figure 19: Poshan Maah performance by participation across India, 2020
Note: The number of participants include repeat and recurrent participation
The State-level performance of participation in Poshan Maah was computed based on 
an index that includes factors like total activities, number of AWCs and the number of 
activities in the States/Districts. Figure 19 summarises the total number of activities and 
participation under Poshan Maah nationwide.
POSHAN MAAH
2019 2020
Activities
3,66,54,719 14,08,22,709
2019 2020
Total Participation
2,51,39,88,802 3,79,64,93,044
Figure 20: Poshan Maah performance by participation: Comparison between 2019 and 2020
Jan Andolan and Multi-Sectoral Interventions
45
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
All Ministries facilitated convergence through formal circulars and specific instructions to 
their line departments in the States and Districts across themes to fight malnutrition. This 
year, Poshan Maah’s primary themes were identifying and tracking children with SAM and 
promoting kitchen gardens. Figure 21 lists other themes covered under POSHAN Maah 
2020. Many Chief Ministers and various state and district officials have taken a pledge 
to end malnutrition and made it a personal agenda to monitor the progress regularly.
211%%
1100%%
77%%
66%%
 1122%%
66%%
4%
1100%%
110%
44%%
55%
5%
00%%
5
%%%%%%%%%%%%
00%%THEMES
Poshan (Overall Nutrition)
Breastfeeding
Compl. Feeding
Immunisation
Growth Monitoring
Food Fortiﬁcation & Micronutrients
Diarrhoea
Hygiene, Water, Sanitation
Anemia
Adolescent Ed, Diet, Age of Marriage
Antenatal Checkup
ECCE
Online Essay Competition
Plantation
Figure 21: Themes covered under POSHAN Maah, 2020
4.2.2 Convergence of line ministries during Jan Andolan
Various line ministries, including the Ministries of Health and Family Welfare, Drinking 
Water and Sanitation, Rural Development, Human Resource and Development, Information 
and Broadcasting, Panchayati Raj, Tribal Affairs, Housing and Urban Affairs, Electronics 
and Information Technology, Minority Affairs, Ayurveda, Yoga, Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, 
Sowa-Rigpa and Homoeopathy (AYUSH), Youth Affairs and Sports, Social Justice and 
Empowerment, Ministry of Agriculture Cooperation and Farmers Welfare and Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution partnered with the MoWCD during Poshan 
Maah. Grass-root level platforms like Gram Sabhas, SHGs, and field functionaries across 
various ministries and schemes were used for optimum spread and coverage. Table 5 
describes the key activities performed during Poshan Maah by line ministries.
46
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Jan Andolan and Multi-Sectoral InterventionsTable 5: Key activities performed during Poshan Maah by Line Ministries
MINISTRY ACTIVITIES
Ministry of Women and 
Child DevelopmentThe Ministry conducted numerous activities, which included rallies, 
marathons, Pad Yatra, Cycle Yatra, cultural programmes, Nukkad 
Nataks, short film shows, exhibitions, and online competitions on 
nutrition, health, immunisation, and sanitation and health for the 
celebration of Poshan Maah.
The Ministry held four webinars in September. The first webinar 
featured discussions on the need for a renewed focus on nutrition 
during COVID-19, the need for innovation and agro-diversity in 
nutrition, sharing of best practices and success stories in establishing 
nutri-gardens in Lakshadweep AWC, online tracking and adoption of 
Severely Malnourished Children in Gujarat, revamping supplementary 
nutrition preparation and distribution and inclusion of Millets in Odisha, 
adoption of SAM children by Government Officials in Uttrakhand, 
and identification drive for SAM children in the UTs of Dadar and 
Nagar Haveli, and Daman and Dui. The second webinar focused 
on the Nutrient Requirement for Children and Mothers during the 
first 1,000 days. The third webinar focused on the importance of 
sound bone health among Indian children, adolescents, pregnant 
women, and lactating mothers, and the fourth webinar outlined the 
prevention and management of enteric infections in 5-14-year-old 
school children and gave details about the incidence of deaths and 
Disability-adjusted life years lost due to such infections.
On 20 September 2020, the Ministry signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding with the Ministry of AYUSH for integrating AYUSH 
systems with ongoing nutrition interventions under the ICDS 
programme, developing medicinal gardens in identified AWCs and 
conducting Yoga Classes for women and children at all AWCs. 
Ministry of Health and 
Family WelfareAmid the COVID-19 pandemic, the ‘Rashtriya Poshan Maah’ was 
celebrated in the States and UTs abiding by the norms of social 
distancing and avoiding mass gatherings. Many States/UTs 
conducted deworming campaigns under the NDD programme during 
the ‘Rashtriya Poshan Maah’. Albendazole tablet was administered 
through house-to-house visits for the first time under the NDD 
programme. The diarrhoea prevention and management activities, 
and the VHSNDs were also celebrated in the various States/UTs. 
The States and UTs conducted virtual orientation of the staff and 
also conducted webinars on the importance of the first 1,000 days 
of life, anaemia prevention, and breastfeeding and IYCF practices. 
Children with SAM who were treated were discharged from NRCs 
and followed up over the telephone. Kitchen gardens/nutri-gardens 
establishment was also focused in some States. As per the Jan-
Andolan dashboard, 3.77 crore persons participated in 8.1 lakh 
activities conducted by MoHFW and State Health Departments.
Jan Andolan and Multi-Sectoral Interventions
47
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
MINISTRY ACTIVITIES
Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public 
DistributionA total of 1,043 activities were undertaken by the Central and 
State level Department under the Department of Food and 
Public Distribution, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution to celebrate Poshan Maah 2020. The activities included 
awareness-raising on nutrition and diet diversification, plantation 
drive of kitchen and nutri-gardens, cooking recipe competitions, 
online essays, quizzes, slogans, debates, poster and drawing 
competitions, webinars and panel discussions on malnutrition, 
distribution of fortified foods and fruits to the underprivileged 
women and children, and distribution of mixed micro green seeds.
4.3 MULTI-SECTORAL INVOLVEMENT
Nutrition is fundamental to human survival and development and is an essential foundation 
of national development. The launch of POSHAN Abhiyaan has been a watershed 
movement in the series of enhanced allocations, policy measures and advisories issued 
by the Government of India towards the goal of eradicating malnutrition in the country. 
The Abhiyaan has not only given momentum to existing programmes, reoriented policy 
choices and aligned several sectors towards the common goal of eradicating malnutrition, 
it has also been instrumental in instigating a range of policy actions under its ambit within 
a short span of time.
While POSHAN Abhiyaan has an earmarked three-year budget of Rs. 9046.17 crore 
from 2017-18, it is an overarching framework that seeks to leverage funds, functionaries, 
technical resources and information, education, and communication (IEC) activities from 
existing programmes and schemes such as the Integrated Child Development Services 
(ICDS), PMMVY, National Heath Mission (NHM), Swacch Bharat Mission (SBM), National 
Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM), National Rural Employment Guarantee Assurance 
(NREGA) and the Public Distribution System (PDS). The aim is to align the efforts of 
every stakeholder in a direction that could positively impact nutrition outcomes.
POSHAN Abhiyaan is a multi-ministerial effort to address malnutrition through tackling 
its many determinants by strengthening and converging actions to support nutrition in 
many Ministries. Although efforts are led by the MoWCD, critical actions have also been 
taken by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution, Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, as well as others. The 
summary of actions, as reported by the key Ministries, is provided below.
4.3.1 Ministry of Women and Child Development
The MoWCD has collaborated with other Ministries like Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food Public 
Distribution, and Ministry of Jal Shakti. The following measures have been taken:
a. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare: The Ministry has been working on 
Intensified Mission Indradhanush 2.0, which provides Pneumococcal Conjugate 
Vaccines (PCV), Rotavirus Vaccines (RVV), National Deworming Day (NDD), 
HBNC, Home Based Care for Young Child (HBYC), institutional deliveries, LBW , 
48
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Jan Andolan and Multi-Sectoral Interventionsantenatal check-up, IFA supplementation, community and home distribution of 
IFA supplementation, vitamin-A supplementation, and Rashtirya Bal Swasthya 
Karyakram (RBSK) for meeting the objective of POSHAN Abhiyaan. During 
the four rounds conducted under Intensified Mission Indradhanush 2.0 from 
December 2019 to March 2020, around 37.09 lakh children and 7.41 lakh pregnant 
women were vaccinated. Similarly, more than 49 lakh doses of PCV have been 
administrated from January 2020 to April 2020, and more than 1.8 crore doses 
of RVV have been administered from January 2020 to April 2020. NDD has been 
conducted in 25 States and UTs and have covered around 11.3 crore children. 
Under HBNC programme 46.92 lakh newborns received complete schedule 
of home visits by accredited social health activists (ASHA), and 2.5 lakhs sick 
newborns have been referred to health facilities. While under HBYC, out of 242 
districts, 238 have completed trainers’ trainings, 1,60,339 frontline workers have 
been trained, and around 1,83,975 children have received visits in 39 districts, 
where 22 are Aspirational Districts.
According to the information shared by MOWCD, 94% of the total deliveries 
reported were conducted in hospitals, 73.4% ANC check-ups were registered in 
the first trimester, 80% of the pregnant women received 4 or more ANC check-
ups, 91% of the pregnant women were given IFA supplementation where the 
IFA supplementation were home delivered extensively from January to March 
2020, and 69.83 lakh children were provided with the first dose of Vitamin A 
supplementation. Under RBSK, 1.2 crore children 0-3 years of age were screened, 
and 3.16 lakh children availed services at secondary tertiary care institute, 1.07 
crore children 4-6 years of age were screened, and 4.91 lakh children availed 
services at secondary tertiary care institute.
b. Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution: The Ministry 
has requested States to operationalize the blending of fortified rice and its 
distribution through PDS, with a special provision for pregnant women, lactating 
mothers, and children 6 months to14 years to free nutritious meal through ICDS 
network and the Mid-Day Meal Scheme (MDMS). So far, 15 State Governments 
agreed to implement the pilot scheme.
c. Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports: The Ministry has launched the Fit India 
Movement, which focuses on improving and promoting physical and mental 
fitness, healthy lifestyles, preventive health care, sustainable and environment-
friendly living, including healthy and balanced diets.
d. Ministry of Safe Drinking Water: The Ministry has taken initiative to provide 
an adequate quantity and quality of safe drinking water to public institutions 
such as Gram Panchayat buildings, schools, AWCs, and health centres through 
a functional household tap connection under ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’.
Additionally, MWCD emphasised improving the supplementary nutrition programme in 
the States. With regard to hot cooked meals and THR, most States prepare a mix of 
regional dishes and staple foods. Additionally, some States have been able to incorporate 
fortified food items in the Supplementary Nutrition Programme. Some States offer sweets 
like kheer, whereas others resort to offering a stipulated number of dry snacks with meals.
Jan Andolan and Multi-Sectoral Interventions
49
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
States have also taken the following measures for POSHAN Abhiyaan:
 ÂTracking of severe underweight in Gujarat:  The state has created a unique 
identification number of the severe underweight children for follow up purposes. 
Phone calls are being made for tracking of THR, monitoring home visits made 
by the AWWs and getting feedback from programme guardians for tracking the 
facilities received by severely underweight children.
 ÂIdentifying drivers of SAM in Dadar and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu : The 
State engaged District Collectors under the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare to organize a drive to identify SAM cases. The drive covered four steps: 
1) growth monitoring, 2) screening, 3) diet diversity and 4) counselling. The drive 
measured 25,800 children out of 28,000.
 ÂRevamping Supplementary Nutrition Programme in Odisha : The State has 
engaged 548 SHGs in THR production and distribution, specifically in roasting, 
weighing, packaging and distribution of grains. This engagement has mitigated 
any programmatic disruptions as a result of the recent floods. Additionally, 
the State has also formed a jaanch-committee at every AWC, which promotes 
transparency.
 Â‘Sarkar Aapke Dwar’ and ‘Sanjeevani’ Programme in Uttarakhand : The State has 
launched the Sarkar Aapke Dwar initiative to sensitise people on malnutrition 
and its ill effects on growth and overall development of the children. They were 
also made aware of the totality of causes that can affect the health of a family. 
The State has also launched Sanjeevani Programme, which provides ₹ 2000 per 
month for 6 months to each SAM child.
Flexi Funds utilisation indicates that, on average, States/UTs have utilized 37% of the 
funds earmarked to the States up until 31 March 2020. States have been utilising the 
Flexi funds for organizing various events and camps that help in meeting the objective 
of the Abhiyaan, capacity building and training of the AWWs, DPOs, CDPOs and State 
Officials, procurement of various materials for AWCs, and incorporating technology for 
effective implementation of POSHAN Abhiyaan. Annexure 4-A provides further details of 
utilization of flexi funds States and UTs had also taken steps for strengthening the Hot 
Cooked Meal Programme, and most States and UTs have also taken additional measures 
to fortify the supplementary nutrition. Annexure 4-D provides state-wise details of the 
supplementary nutrition programme.
Despite the continuous efforts in making India malnutrition free, MoWD has indicated 
that the challenges with respect to training and capacity building of field functionaries, 
and the gaps in infrastructure related to buildings, toilets, and drinking water facilities still 
exist. The roll-out of ICDS-CAS and procurement of growth monitoring devices remains 
have room for improvement, and there is low and delayed utilization of funds. Sustaining 
‘Jan Andolan’ activities is also a major challenge for the Ministry.
4.3.2 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
The National Health Mission (NHM) under the MoHFW plays a vital role in the success 
of POSHAN Abhiyaan as both the missions share similar goals such as the reduction of 
50
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Jan Andolan and Multi-Sectoral Interventionsundernutrition, anaemia and the prevalence of LBW. Various health sector interventions 
that are instrumental in the success of POSHAN Abhiyaan include:
a. Home-Based Care of Young Child (HBYC): The HBYC programme involves 
additional home visits over and above the existing HBNC visits for nutrition 
promotion. Ministry has sanctioned an amount of Rs. 217.68 crore for the 
programme to be implemented across 242 Districts including 112 Aspirational 
Districts. As far as capacity building of frontline workers is concerned, 31 States/
UTs have completed the training of trainers, and 27 States/UTs have started 
the training of frontline workers for HBYC. A total of 1,60,339 frontline workers 
covering 179 districts across 26 States/UTs have been trained. Additionally, home 
visits have started in 16 states covering 55 Districts including 31 Aspirational 
Districts. The Ministry has further included 275 additional Districts under HBYC 
in the FY 2020-21.
b. Home-Based New-Born Care (HBNC): A total of 1.42 crore newborns have 
received home visits by ASHAs in 2019-20 and 5.68 lakh newborns have been 
referred. The average HBNC home visit coverage has increased from 71.2% in 
2018-19 to 78.6% in 2019-20, and around 90% of round 3 training of the ASHAs 
has been completed.
c. Anaemia Mukt Bharat (AMB):  Under the programme, central procurement of 
IFA supplements has been made available, and the procurement for red and 
blue IFA tablets is underway in 14 States/UTs. Considering the current COVID-19 
pandemic, the comprehensive AMB training toolkit is being converted into an 
e-learning module for online capacity building of the service providers and 
programme managers. In FY 2019-20, 1.7 crore children 6-59 months of age 
were provided weekly IFA syrup every month, and 2.8 crore children 5-9 years 
of age were provided weekly pink IFA tablets every month. Similarly, 4.5 crore 
children 10-19 years of age were provided blue IFA tablets every month, and 2.6 
crore pregnant women and 1.4 crore lactating women were provided 180 IFA 
red tablets in FY 2019-20.
d. National Deworming Day and Mission Indradhanush: In 2019-20, four rounds of 
Intensified Mission Indradhanush were conducted from December 2019 to March 
2020 in 381 identified districts of 29 States/UTs. In total, 1102.33 lakh (95%) 
children were covered. States like Jammu and Kashmir, Meghalaya and Himachal 
Pradesh conducted their first round of vaccination in October-November 2019 
and covered 62.45 lakh children. Under various phases of Mission Indradhanush, 
3.76 crore children and 94.6 lakh pregnant women have been vaccinated as of 
March 2020. The full immunisation coverage for 2019-2020 is 92.83%, as per 
the HMIS.
e. Intensified Diarrhoea Control Fortnight (IDCF) and severe acute malnutrition 
(SAM) treatment in Nutritional Rehabilitation Centre (NRC):  In 2019, families 
of more than 10 crore under-five children were provided with ORS packets, 
counselling on the use of ORS and zinc and proper nutrition during diarrhoea. 
An estimated 75% of beneficiaries were covered during this period. Additionally, 
Jan Andolan and Multi-Sectoral Interventions
51
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
as per FY 2019-20, there were 1,072 functional NRCs in 28 States, where 2.25 
lakh sick SAM children received treatment.
f. Rashtriya Kishori Swasthya Karyakram (RKSK) and Ayushman Bharat School 
Health and Wellness Programme: The RKSK counsellors and peer educators 
have been involved in spreading awareness on nutrition. Additionally, information 
on nutrition and health in schools with adolescent girls attending upper primary 
senior secondary classes have been taken by rigorously by health and wellness 
ambassadors (trained school teacher) as a part of Ayushman Bharat School 
Health and Wellness Programme.
4.3.3 Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
On Independence Day in 2014, the Honourable Prime Minister of India recognised the need 
for affirmative action for a Swachh Bharat by 2 October 2019. The Mission’s resolution was 
for a clean and Open Defecation Free (ODF) India by October 2019. As of March 2020, 
a total of 706 Districts and 6.03 lakh villages were declared ODF, and 3.94 lakh villages 
have been covered with piped water supply. Furthermore, the information provided by 
States/UTs indicates that, out of 4,588 arsenic affected habitats, 319 have so far been 
provided with safe drinking water. Moreover, out of 6,233 fluoride affected habitats, 830 
have been provided with safe drinking water.
The Ministry has implemented Jal Jeevan Mission–Har Ghar Jal in partnership with 
States to provide every rural household in the country to have potable water supply 
through Functional Household Tap Connections by 2024. As of November 2020, the 
mission has identified a total of 27,544 habitations, including 13,819 arsenic affected and 
13,725 fluoride-affected rural habitations, to provide safe drinking water. To date, 3,647 
habitations have been covered.
In addition to this, some States have taken the following initiatives:
 ÂODF Plus activities galore in Kodagu, Karnataka: The district administration 
of Kodagu in Karnataka has engaged in various activities to ensure ODF 
sustainability. As a part of Swachh Sundar Shauchalaya, campaigns for creating 
awareness on the importance of using toilets were held in schools, anganwadis, 
and community public toilets. In addition, the district adopted the Pay-and-Use 
model of community toilets so that funds could be gathered for painting the 
toilets. On World Environment Day 2020, a campaign was held for Liquid Waste 
Management and Solid Waste Management at household- and Gram Panchayat-
levels. Similarly, many mass awareness activities were planned, which included 
Jathas or street plays, school competitions, clean-up campaigns, tree plantations, 
marathons and debates, which raised awareness on ODF sustainability.
 ÂSindhora becomes MP’s first Single-Use Plastic Free Gram Panchayat: With a 
bartan bank in place, Sindhora Gram Panchayat in Indore District of Madhya 
Pradesh became the State’s first single-use plastic free Gram Panchayat. The 70-
day campaign began in 425 households on 2 October 2019, and was implemented 
by an all-woman team. Children, women, and other community members joined 
52
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Jan Andolan and Multi-Sectoral Interventionsto clean the village, install dustbins at strategic places and plant saplings on 
roadsides and public spaces. Meanwhile, school children carried out awareness 
rallies and performed nukkad nataks. A door-to-door campaign, where cloth 
bags were distributed to homes and residents were asked to refrain from using 
plastic bags, was also carried out. A logo sticker was affixed to every house to 
highlight their commitment of not using plastic. In addition, a bartan bank was 
set up where a whole range of utensils could be borrowed at Rs. 1/- per piece 
for marriages and other events to reduce the use of plastic.
4.3.4 Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food, and Public Distribution
The Government of India has approved the centrally sponsored pilot scheme on 
‘Fortification of Rice and its Distribution under PDS’  for three years beginning in 2019-
20, with a total budget outlay of Rs 174.64 crore. Fifteen State Governments—Andhra 
Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Odisha, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Assam, Tamil 
Nadu, Telangana, Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Uttarakhand and Madhya Pradesh—
have consented and identified their respective districts for implementation of the pilot 
scheme. The States of Maharashtra, Gujarat Andhra Pradesh started distributing fortified 
rice under the pilot scheme in February 2020, February 2020, and April 2020, respectively. 
States of Tamil Nadu, Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Uttar Pradesh and Odisha are expected to 
start soon.
In addition, the Ministry has issued a D.O. letter to the Secretaries of Food, Civil Supplies 
and Consumer Affairs of all States/UTs emphasizing the nutritional benefits of fortified 
edible oils. The Ministry has also requested all the States/UTs to distribute fortified wheat 
flour as per Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) standards through 
PDS in their respective States/UTs.
However, the Ministry has faced numerous challenges in implementing rice fortification. 
Since the success of the pilot scheme depends on the rice millers, as the blending of 
the fortified rice kernels with rice requires rice milling. Thus, bringing the private millers 
to make investments for the same is a challenge that the Ministry is facing. Additionally, 
under Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS), about 350 lakh metric tonnes (LMT) of 
rice is distributed and thus a total of 3.5 LMT of fortified rice kernels is required. However, 
the availability of the fortified rice kernel stands at approximately 15,000 MTs/annum 
currently. Furthermore, the capacity of the National Accreditation Board for Testing and 
Calibration Laboratories (NABL)-accredited laboratories should be strengthened for the 
successful implementation of rice fortification.
4.3.5 Initiative by Development Partners
In addition to the steps taken by the Development Partners for implementing POSHAN 
Abhiyaan during COVID-19, development partners have actively undertaken the regular 
activities for POSHAN Abhiyaan. Box 3 presents an example of one such project.
Jan Andolan and Multi-Sectoral Interventions
53
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
BOX 3: IMPROVING THE MICRONUTRIENT PROFILE OF THE 
ICDS BENEFICIARIES
The United Nations World Food Programme (WFP) has taken many steps to 
address the gap in the intake of micronutrients, especially in Kerala. Along with 
the Department of Women and Child Development, Kerala, and the Kudumbashree 
Mission – a federation of women’s self-help groups that produce take-home rations 
(THR) under the ICDS. WFP has piloted projects on fortification of THR and the 
rice-based hot-cooked meals served to children in Anganwadi Centres (AWC).
Under their project in Waynad, Kerala, the organisation has fortified the THR for 
children 6-36 months, with 11 micronutrients consisting of calcium, iron, zinc, vitamin 
A, thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6, vitamin C, folic acid and vitamin B12. The 
pilot project started in the Mananthavady block of Wayand district, wherein WFP set 
up a Nutrimix unit, developed awareness material to improve nutrition and feeding 
practices among children 6-36 months of age, and trained officials for carrying out 
fortification. Later, the project was scaled-up to all 14 districts, which also included 
the distribution of IEC materials for improving nutritional intake, and the capacity 
building and cascade training of Kudumbashree members. With the scale-up, over 
4,00,000 beneficiaries are reached with fortified THR every month, and on average, 
1,300 metric tonnes (MT) of fortified Nutrimix has been produced and distributed 
monthly through 33,115 AWCs since May 2019.
Similarly, WFP and the Department of Women and Child Development, Kerala are 
working towards mainstreaming rice fortification in the ICDS scheme in Kannur Kerala 
for children 3-6 years of age. WFP facilitated the installation and commissioning 
of a rice fortification unit in the Supply-Co facility at Thaliparamba in Kannur. The 
rice received from FCI at SupplyCo is then blended with rice kernels containing 
eight micronutrients, which are then distributed to Maveli Stores. In addition, the 
Kudumbashree members are trained for the fortification process, withdrawing 
samples for testing, and undertaking blending efficiency tests to ensure quality. 
In January 2020, WFP trained 135 government officials on rice fortification, and 
the team further addressed the queries of the officials on various aspects of rice 
fortification. The project has fortified 86.6 MT of FCI rice, which has been distributed 
across 915 AWCs reaching 14,100 children. Considering the success of the pilot 
project, the project is now in the process of being scaled up across other districts 
in Kerala.
Source: World Food Programme
4.4 CONCLUSION AND WAY FORWARD
The actions taken across Ministries to support India’s nutrition goals are commendable. 
They take us closer to achieving the goals of effective convergence, and can support 
convergent action planning. However, for maximum impact, diverse actions across 
54
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Jan Andolan and Multi-Sectoral InterventionsMinistries must reach the last mile and ensure that all actions reach all households in the 
first 1,000 days. To achieve this, we recommend the following:
 ÂLocal innovations are essential to ensure that actions of MWCD and MoHFW 
reach 1,000-day households fully so that each action/intervention is timed and 
targeted appropriately and delivered with quality. This could require aligning 
catchment areas and target populations at the local level, tracking of services 
received and missed across both health and ICDS, and use of local data to support 
co-coverage. Additionally, since MWCD and MoHFW use different applications 
for tracking the same beneficiaries leading to duplication, therefore efforts are 
required to develop a common platform for convergence of AWW, ASHA, and 
ANM.
 ÂCo-locate critical actions of all ministries in focus districts and focus blocks within 
districts, especially those actions that address underlying causes of malnutrition 
such as poor sanitation, gender issues, poverty, food insecurity. This again will 
require local action
 ÂConvergence and co-location will likely be more challenging in urban areas; 
this will require close attention to local governance models in urban areas, 
engagement of private providers and innovations around demand creation.
 ÂThe 11th Schedule of Constitution lists 29 subjects within the functions of the 
Panchayat. The schedule mandates PRIs to take measures for family welfare and 
women and child development. Therefore, it is recommended that the PRI should 
be involved in organizing and mobilizing beneficiaries through community-based 
events.
 ÂThere is also a need to design the activities and events in a way that they focus 
on sustained capacity building of the eligible household through interpersonal 
dialogue, rather than giving short-lived information. In addition to the FLWs, peer 
educators, local NGOs/CSOs/community volunteer groups, such as NCC/NSS 
students and women volunteers from SHGs should also be involved, as this will 
achieve the dual objective of community engagement without compromising 
home visits by FLWs.
Jan Andolan and Multi-Sectoral Interventions
55
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN 
Abhiyaan Interventions 
during a Pandemic: 
How are States doing?
5
The COVID-19 pandemic disrupted progress on many activities in 2020, including the 
delivery of health and nutrition services under the POSHAN Abhiyaan umbrella framework 
of interventions. This chapter aims to quantitatively examine the impact of the pandemic 
on the delivery of some of the POSHAN Abhiyaan interventions, drawing on publicly 
available data. The restoration of key services over the course of the year is also examined.
Various activities conducted under MWCD and MoHFW were disrupted during the peak 
of the lockdown period (April-June 2020). However, several policy adaptations and 
interventions have been undertaken by central and State authorities to restore service 
delivery. This section summarises the stringent actions taken by MoWCD and MoHFW 
to prevent the spread of COVID-19, analyses the disruption in key health and nutrition 
services, and reviews strategies adopted by States to continue service delivery amid 
COVID-19.
For the purpose of examining the adaptations in response of COVID-19 pandemic, the 
state policy guidance from March until October 2020 for 13 States (Andhra Pradesh, 
Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal) was assessed using the comprehensive 
guidance  issued by MoHFW and state-level documentation. To assess the impacts of 
COVID-19 on the delivery of health and Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS), 
MPR and HMIS State/UT-wise data were used for five quarters—that is, from October-
December 2019 to October-December 2020. Lastly, administrative data from State/UT 
Template were utilised to highlight the innovative steps undertaken by the Department 
of Women and Child Development (DWCD) and Department of Health for the provision 
of services despite the COVID-19-related disruptions.
5.1 WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES
To curtail the spread of the pandemic, Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) were closed, and 
services were disrupted. Operation of ICDS platforms including Anganwadi Centres, 
57
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
VHSNDs, home visits, counselling and food supplementation for children, and pregnant 
and lactating were examined for assessing the impact of COVID-19 on implementation 
of these key women and child services.
5.1.1  Disruptions and policy adaptations of service delivery 
platforms
During the strict lockdown months, AWCs were closed across states. In November 2020, 
the MWCD issued guidance to open AWCs and resume services outside containment zones 
by following COVID-19 safety protocols at the AWCs. VHSNDs were partly operational 
in a few states following staggered approach and in non-containment zones. Routine 
services were provided on-demand at health centres. In April 2020, the MoHFW issued 
guidance on the delivery of health and nutrition services through home visits by FLWs. 
Several states continued home visits and bundled essential services, such as distribution 
of food supplements and counselling of beneficiaries, with home visits. This step was 
taken by most states to ensure continuity of services (Figure 22).
State Platforms Interventions across life 
stages 
Anganwadi 
centre open*Village 
Health & 
Nutrition DayHome visits Counselling Food  
supplemen -
tationMay 
Aug
Sep/Oct
May 
Aug
Sep/Oct
May 
Aug
Sep/Oct
May 
Aug
Sep/Oct
May 
Aug
Sep/Oct
Andhra Pradesh                              
Assam                              
Bihar                              
Chhattisgarh                              
Gujarat                              
Jharkhand                              
Karnataka                              
Madhya Pradesh                              
Maharashtra                              
Odisha                              
Rajasthan                              
Uttar Pradesh                              
West Bengal                              
*In November 2020, national guidance was issued to open Anganwadi centers.
No information  
Partly operational (i.e., for some groups of population or 
geographic restrictions)  
Fully operational  
Service suspended  
 
Figure 22: Policy guidance for implementation platforms and interventions across life stages
58
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?5.1.2  Insights on disruption and restoration of supplementary 
nutrition during COVID-19 pandemic
To assess the impact of COVID-19 on ICDS service delivery, State/UT-wise quarterly data 
were used for five quarters—that is, from October-December 2019 to October-December 
2020—on two indicators:
1. Number of children 6 months to 6 years old who received supplementary 
nutrition; and
2. Number of pregnant and lactating women who received supplementary nutrition
Analyses of disruptions and restorations on ICDS services were conducted using data 
from the ICDS monthly progress reports (MPR), provided by MWCD. The number of 
beneficiaries at the national-level for each quarter was calculated by adding the number 
of beneficiaries for all States and UTs. For assessing the change, the quarters were 
divided into pre-pandemic period (October-December 2019), disruption period (April-
June 2020), early restoration period (July-September 2020) and restoration period 
(October-December 2020). Section 2.5.2 provides more information on the methodology 
for analysing the data.
Key findings from changes in coverage of supplementary nutrition
The number of beneficiaries who received supplementary nutrition declined during the 
lockdown period, which suggests that services were disrupted. The coverage of food 
supplementation for children 6 months to 6 years of age and pregnant and lactating 
women was disrupted slightly during the lockdown period. According to the MWCD 
mandate, food supplements were to be delivered to beneficiary households during the 
lockdown, which mitigated disruptions. Between the fourth quarter of 2019 (October-
December 2019) and the second quarter of 2020 (April-June 2020), the coverage of 
supplementary nutrition dropped by 2% and 3% for children and for pregnant and 
lactating women, respectively.
Compared with the pre-pandemic period (October-December 2019), coverage increased 
during the third quarter (July-September 2020) by 6% for children and by 2% for 
pregnant and lactating women. This suggests that coverage of supplementary nutrition 
programme (SNP) was gradually recovering. However, the coverage of supplementary 
nutrition declined in the fourth quarter (October-December 2020), which was lower than 
the pre-pandemic period.
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?
59
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Figure 23: Changes in supplementary nutrition as per MPR data, October 2019 to 
December 2020
Source: Monthly Progress Report Data, Ministry of Women and Child Development
At the State-level, the number of children 6 months to 6 years of age who received 
supplementary nutrition reduced in 8 States and UTs in April-June 2020 compared with 
the pre-pandemic period (October-December 2019) (Figure 24). However, despite the 
lockdown, the coverage of supplementary nutrition was greater than or equal to the 
pre-pandemic period in 28 States and UTs. During the July-September 2020 reference 
period, the coverage of supplementary nutrition improved in 6 States/UTs where service 
had been disrupted. In Madhya Pradesh, Goa and Delhi, the coverage was restored to 
the pre-pandemic levels. By the end of the fourth quarter (October-December 2020), 
coverage was greater than or equal to pre-pandemic levels in 32 States and UTs, but it 
had declined substantially in Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh.
Compared with the pre-pandemic period (October-December 2019), the number of 
pregnant and lactating women who received supplementary nutrition declined in 16 States 
and UTs during the second quarter of 2020 (April-June 2020) (Figure 25). Conversely, 
coverage increased or remained the same in 20 States and UTs. Early restoration efforts 
were visible during the July-September 2020 period, as there was an improvement in 
coverage of SNP in 10 States/UTs, which previously experienced disruption. Additionally, 
Madhya Pradesh and Delhi recovered to pre-pandemic levels during this quarter. By the 
end of the fourth quarter (October-December 2020), coverage in 23 States and UTs was 
greater than or equal to pre-pandemic levels, but it declined in 11 States and UTs.
60
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?State/UTsDisruption  
(Q2 of 2020 to 
Q4 of 2019)Early Restoration 
(Q3 of 2020 to Q4 
of 2019)Restoration (Q4 
of 2020 to Q4 of 
2019)
Large StatesAndhra Pradesh 113% 115% 119%
Assam 100% 103% 103%
Bihar 68% 76% 102%
Chhattisgarh 118% 126% 120%
Gujarat 116% 118% 122%
Haryana 130% 133% 136%
Himachal Pradesh 100% 104% 106%
Jharkhand 75% 67% 87%
Karnataka 111% 109% 113%
Kerala 120% 133% 135%
Madhya Pradesh 52% 112% 85%
Maharashtra 118% 124% 122%
Odisha 113% 114% 114%
Punjab 122% 126% 125%
Rajasthan 105% 108% 128%
Tamil Nadu 105% 106% 107%
Telangana 108% 112% 119%
Uttar Pradesh 94% 96% 41%
Uttarakhand 116% 121% 107%
West Bengal 114% 118% 120%
Small StatesArunachal Pradesh 100% 100% 100%
Goa 99% 100% 106%
Manipur 102% 102% 103%
Meghalaya 98% 99% 99%
Mizoram 117% 125% 108%
Nagaland 111% 111% 110%
Sikkim 120% 127% 132%
Tripura 110% 110% 110%
Union 
TerritoriesAndaman & 
Nicobar115% 133% 145%
Chandigarh 98% 94% 106%
D & N Haveli & 
Daman and Diu117% 129% 124%
Delhi 99% 125% 136%
Jammu & Kashmir 180% 750% 161%
Ladakh 103% 108% 110%
Lakshadweep 113% 115% 108%
Puducherry 112% 116% 123%
All India 98% 106% 97%
Key>= 100%
<100% and >= 75%
<75% and >= 50%
<75% and >= 25%
<25%
Figure 24: Disruption and restoration of supplementary nutrition among children 
6 months to 6 years of age during the COVID-19 pandemic, MPR data, October 
2019 to December 2020
Source: Monthly Progress Report Data, Ministry of Women and Child Development
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?
61
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
State/UTsDisruption (Q2 
of 2020 to Q4 of 
2019)Early Restoration  
(Q3 of 2020 to 
Q4 of 2019)Restoration (Q4 
of 2020 to Q4 of 
2019)
Large StatesAndhra Pradesh 108% 111% 111%
Assam 100% 101% 101%
Bihar 78% 88% 108%
Chhattisgarh 112% 119% 113%
Gujarat 95% 99% 100%
Haryana 120% 119% 121%
Himachal Pradesh 97% 97% 96%
Jharkhand 60% 44% 75%
Karnataka 131% 135% 143%
Kerala 118% 121% 112%
Madhya Pradesh 50% 112% 81%
Maharashtra 101% 102% 98%
Odisha 108% 109% 109%
Punjab 119% 111% 114%
Rajasthan 119% 111% 129%
Tamil Nadu 97% 99% 100%
Telangana 122% 131% 131%
Uttar Pradesh 94% 92% 39%
Uttarakhand 105% 105% 93%
West Bengal 115% 116% 117%
Small StatesArunachal Pradesh 100% 100% 100%
Goa 89% 86% 82%
Manipur 102% 103% 104%
Meghalaya 83% 83% 82%
Mizoram 98% 99% 86%
Nagaland 101% 101% 101%
Sikkim 162% 174% 171%
Tripura 105% 105% 105%
Union 
TerritoriesAndaman & Nicobar 116% 136% 138%
Chandigarh 77% 92% 96%
D & N Haveli & 
Daman and Diu96% 83% 80%
Delhi 93% 112% 118%
Jammu & Kashmir 186% 161% 148%
Ladakh 95% 98% 97%
Lakshadweep 96% 99% 103%
Puducherry 92% 99% 95%
All India 97% 102% 91%
Key>= 100%
<100% and >= 75%
<75% and >= 50%
<75% and >= 25%
<25%
Figure 25: Disruption and restoration of supplementary nutrition among pregnant 
and lactating women during pandemic, MPR data, October 2019 to December 2020
Source: Monthly Progress Report Data, Ministry of Women and Child Development
62
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?Overall, services were disrupted during the lockdown period (April-June 2020), and were 
eventually restored between July and September 2020. The improvement in SNP services 
may be attributed to the rigorous steps taken by States and UTs for increasing the 
provision of take-home rations in response to the pandemic. Although coverage reduced 
during October-December 2020, coverage was about 90% of what was achieved during 
the pre-pandemic period.
5.1.3  State innovations in delivering ICDS services (core POSHAN 
Abhiyaan Interventions)
States adopted different strategies to continue service delivery amid COVID-19. These 
adaptations varied geographically and by type of service. Most states adapted to ensure 
that the core ICDS services continued to reach all beneficiaries. Out of 32 states/UTs 
for which State data were received, 28 states/UTs reported making some adaptations/
innovations to ensure service delivery. Table 6 summarises the type of innovations at the 
State/UT-level, by services.
Table 6: Summary of ICDS programme delivery innovations in the context of 
COVID-19, as reported by State Governments
State/UTsSNP: 
Additional 
foodsInnovations 
for growth 
monitoring Innovations 
for 
community-
based eventsInnovations 
for 
counsellingInnovations 
for pre-
school 
education
Andaman 
& Nicobar 
IslandsMilkAt AWC & 
and during 
home visits In staggered 
approach Home 
visits and 
consultation 
through tele 
callingHome visits 
Andhra 
PradeshSpecial 
supplements 
for SAM 
childrenStaggered 
approach in 
AWCVirtual CBEsHome visits 
and virtual 
counselling Virtual 
classes
Arunachal 
PradeshEggsRandom 
sampling 
in AWC to 
identify and 
manage 
cases of SAMIn staggered 
approach in 
AWCHome visits 
for vulnerable 
groups Parents 
counselled 
during home 
visits 
Assam Home visitsVideo 
conferencing Virtual 
classes
Bihar
ChandigarhDry ration & 
cooked foods 
to people in 
need (March 
to June only)Home visits Virtual CBEsVideo 
messages, 
posters and 
callingPhone-based 
activities
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?
63
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
State/UTsSNP: 
Additional 
foodsInnovations 
for growth 
monitoring Innovations 
for 
community-
based eventsInnovations 
for 
counsellingInnovations 
for pre-
school 
education
ChhattisgarhDry rations, 
eggs and 
vegetables During home 
visits and 
VHSNDsDuring home 
visits and in 
community 
spaces Video clips 
shared over 
social mediaVirtual 
classes
DNH & DDSpecial local 
preparationsIn staggered 
approach in 
AWCDuring home 
visits Phone-based 
activities. 
Learning 
material 
distributed
Delhi Iron-rich THRDuring home 
visits Virtual CBEsDuring home 
visits Phone-based 
activities
GoaMicronutrient 
supplements 
for children 
3 to 6 
years and 
adolescent 
girls Through 
WhatsApp
Gujarat Virtual CBEsLocal TV 
channels
HaryanaSkimmed 
milk powder SAM children 
weighed at 
homeIn staggered 
approach in 
AWCDuring home 
visits and 
in shelter 
homes for 
migrant 
populationChildren 
of migrant 
labourers 
provided 
pre-school 
education
Himachal 
PradeshStaggered 
approach in 
AWCUse of mobile 
phones 
Jammu & 
Kashmir
Jharkhand
KarnatakaMilk and eggs
Spot feeding 
for PW/LWDuring home 
visits Virtual 
classes and 
radio
KeralaDry rations 
& delivery 
of food for 
quarantined 
homesDuring 
VHSNDsVirtual CBEsWhatsApp 
based 
broadcast 
system- 
POSHAN vaniVirtual 
classes and 
through local 
TV channels
Ladakh
64
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?State/UTsSNP: 
Additional 
foodsInnovations 
for growth 
monitoring Innovations 
for 
community-
based eventsInnovations 
for 
counsellingInnovations 
for pre-
school 
education
Lakshadweep Dry rationsStaggered 
approach in 
AWCDuring home 
visits 
Madhya 
PradeshDry rationsStaggered 
approach 
during home 
visits and 
VHSNDsThrough 
calling and 
WhatsApp
MaharashtraOnce a 
week/2 week 
visit to SAM/
MAM children 
by AWWVirtual CBEsThrough 
calling and 
WhatsAppVirtual 
classes
Manipur Template not received 
Meghalaya Template not received 
MizoramVegetables 
from nutri-
gardensConducted 
at AWC & 
and during 
home visitsThrough 
calling and 
WhatsAppLearning 
material 
distributed; 
parents 
given virtual 
instructions 
Nagaland Template not received 
Odisha Dry rations During 
VHSNDs and 
home visitsIn staggered 
approach in 
AWCDuring home 
visits Virtual 
classes
PuducherryDuring home 
visits and in 
community 
spaces Home visits 
and use of 
television 
Punjab Home visits Virtual 
classes
Rajasthan Dry rations Use of mobile 
phones 
SikkimIn staggered 
approach in 
AWCHome visits 
Tamil NaduVirtual 
classes
TelanganaBananas and 
special local 
preparationsHome visitsVirtual 
classes and 
through local 
TV channels
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?
65
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
State/UTsSNP: 
Additional 
foodsInnovations 
for growth 
monitoring Innovations 
for 
community-
based eventsInnovations 
for 
counsellingInnovations 
for pre-
school 
education
TripuraEggs, jaggery 
and milk for 
SAM children Growth 
monitoring 
conducted 
during home 
visitsDuring home 
visits Home visitsLearning 
material 
provided 
during home 
visits
Uttar 
PradeshDuring 
VHSNDsHome visits
UttarakhandEggs, milk 
and bananas 
for 3-6-year 
oldsHome visits Home visitsVideo 
conferencingVirtual 
classes
West 
BengalTemplate not received 
Source: Reported by States in response to questionnaires sent by NITI Aayog in September 2020
Note: ( 1) Dry ration includes rice, wheat, and pulses. (2) All the activities conducted in-person at AWC, homes 
or community spaces followed COVID-19 protocol.
Foods in addition to the standard take-home rations
Several States provided specific foods in addition to the standard THR. Most states 
provided dry rations (e.g., rice, wheat, pulses), whereas some provided milk, eggs or 
other local preparations. Mizoram provided harvests from nutri-gardens. In most states, 
all ICDS foods were delivered to homes.
Growth monitoring
During the stringent lockdown period and after it was relaxed, some States continued to 
conduct growth monitoring, primarily for children affected by severe acute malnutrition 
(SAM) and moderate acute malnutrition (MAM). Several states conducted growth 
monitoring in AWCs, during VHSNDs and during home visits following the COVID-19 
protocol. Maharashtra ensured visits by AWWs to SAM/MAM children once a week or 
once every two weeks.
Community-based events
Community-based events (CBEs) resumed gradually after the lockdown was relaxed. In 
several states, CBEs were transitioned to be conducted during home visits as well as in 
AWC, maintaining COVID-19 protocols.
Counselling
Several states used phone calls and applications to continue counselling amid the 
pandemic. Counselling services were also provided during home visits in several states. 
Two states (Assam and Uttarakhand) used video conferences as a medium to deliver 
counselling messages. One UT (Puducherry) used the local television channel to share 
counselling messages.
66
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?Pre-school education
States/UTs primarily relied upon virtual media and phone-based activities to deliver pre-
school education. Three states/UTs (Dadra & Nagar Haveli & Daman & Diu, Mizoram and 
Tripura) ensure distribution of learning materials during home visits. Three states (Gujarat, 
Kerala and Telangana) used local television channels to telecast the curriculum.
BOX 4: STUDY TO ASSESS THE THR PRODUCTION AND 
DISTRIBUTION ACROSS 12 DISTRICTS IN JHARKHAND AND 
RAJASTHAN
Due to the disruption in the food systems amid the COVID-19 pandemic, NITI 
Aayog, IDInsight and CIFF conducted a study to assess the THR production and 
distribution across 12 districts in Jharkhand and Rajasthan. The first round of surveys 
was conducted in January 2020 and the second round of surveys was conducted 
in July-August 2020. Under the study, a qualitative survey was conducted over 
phone with 114 respondents, which included 15 pregnant women, 13 mothers of 
children aged 0-6 months, 26 mothers of children aged 6-36 months, 54 Anganwadi 
Workers, and 6 SHG Members. Pregnant women and mothers were surveyed to 
understand the demand-side challenges, whereas AWWs and SHGs were surveyed 
for identifying the supply-side challenges.
According to the study, there has been a 12 percentage point drop in THR access in 
Jharkhand and a 5 percentage point drop in THR access in Rajasthan from January 
2020 to May 2020. In Jharkhand, the demand-side actors indicated that there has 
been an irregular supply of the THR, while many of the beneficiaries were unable to 
receive the THR since April 2020. Most of the AWW also indicated that they were 
unable to distribute the THR since April or earlier, and only few AWW distributed 
THR in July or August. In addition to COVID-19, the reasons for irregular supply of 
the THR was because SHGs are not reimbursed timely for the previous deliveries, the 
price of the raw materials have increased even as reimbursement rates remain fixed, 
and there have been delays in receiving beneficiary lists from AWWs especially since 
the lockdown. In Rajasthan, half of the interviewed beneficiaries did not receive THR 
during lockdown. AWWs also indicated that they missed at least 1 month of THR 
distribution since the lockdown. Rajasthan also faced challenges like insufficient 
supply of THR at PDS, delays in reimbursement to AWW for transportation of THR, 
and difficulty in transporting big packets of THR from suppliers to Anganwadi 
Centres which further aggravated due to COVID-19.
Addressing delays in funding and payments, providing procurement support, and 
enhancing trust and communication between demand-side and supply-side actors 
could help improve the access and distribution of the THR.
Source: IDInsight and NITI Aayog
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?
67
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
BOX 5: FRONTLINE HEALTH WORKERS ENABLE RESTORATION 
OF HEALTH AND NUTRITION SERVICE DELIVERY AFTER EARLY 
COVID-19 LOCKDOWN: FINDINGS FROM A SEVEN-STATE 
OBSERVATIONAL STUDY
As the COVID-19 pandemic unfolded, countries took various actions including 
stringent lockdowns, imposing travel restrictions, and mandating face masks to 
stem the spread of the pandemic. Early during the pandemic, modelling studies 
based on Lives Saved Tool (LiST) (Roberton et.al, 2020), suggested that closures 
to health and nutrition services would have substantial impacts on maternal, child 
health and nutrition outcomes.
In India, there was an early recognition of the importance of preserving essential 
services. The first set of policy directives to restart essential nutrition and health 
services were released in March and early April 2020. The early and adaptive policy 
guidance signalled a strong intent to resume services rapidly, but little is known 
about how this has played out on the ground. India drew on its strong cadre of 
nearly 2.42 million health and nutrition frontline workers (FLWs) across the two 
national flagship programmes–the Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) 
and the National Health Mission (NHM) –to deliver the services.
To understand how FLWs are responding to the government guidance and delivering 
these interventions during the pandemic, phone surveys with 5,500 FLWs were 
conducted in seven states (Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Tamil 
Nadu, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh) between August-October 2020, asking about 
service delivery during April 2020 (T1) and in the August-October 2020 period 
(T2). Changes were analysed between T1 and T2 periods.
The Anganwadi Centres (AWC) were not opened daily across the states in April 
(T1). While nearly all FLWs in Telangana and 84% in Chhattisgarh reported opening 
their AWCs daily, 49% in Bihar, 44% in Odisha, 18% in Uttar Pradesh and only 7% 
in Tamil Nadu reported doing so. In the post-lockdown period (T2), a much larger 
proportion of FLWs reported opening the centres. Fewer AWWs in Tamil Nadu (21%) 
and Odisha (54.2%) reported opening the centres compared with other states.
In April, a majority of FLWs (65% to 100%) in all states distributed food supplements. 
Nearly all FLWs in all states resumed the service in T2, except in Bihar where 
only half of FLWs provided this service compared with T1 (Figure 2). Holding of 
VHSND varied widely across the states in April, with the lowest by FLW Bihar 
(1.5%) and Uttar Pradesh (9%), and the highest in Odisha (91%). In T2, conducting 
of VHSND increased in all the states; 84 percentage point increase noted in Bihar, 
78 percentage points in Uttar Pradesh and 58 percentage points in Tamil Nadu.
68
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?A majority of FLWs in five states conducted home visits (74% to 99%) during 
the lockdown except for Bihar (51%) and Uttar Pradesh (32%). In T2, home visits 
increased by 41 percentage points in Bihar and 59 percentage points in Uttar Pradesh. 
Except in Uttar Pradesh (14%), >50% FLWs reported providing counselling on health 
and nutrition in April and nearly all FLWs in all states reported reinstatement of 
the service in T2. Between 40–85% FLWs in reported providing IFA supplements 
to pregnant women in April, except in Bihar (11%). In T2, IFA provision increased 
by 11 to 44 pp among states. In April, only 12–22% FLWs reported conducting 
growth monitoring in five states, but service provision increased by 26–75 pp in 
T2. In contrast, a majority of FLWs in Chhattisgarh and Odisha conducted growth 
monitoring in T1 and T2. Except in Bihar (2%), >50% FLWs supported immunisation 
services for children during the lockdown; service provision increased by 9–83 
pp in T2. Majority of FLWs in Chhattisgarh (86%) and Odisha (91%) supported 
immunisation services in April. In addition to delivering maternal and child nutrition 
services, FLWs performed several COVID-19 specific duties. The challenges faced by 
FLWs in delivering services varied by the state. Most FLWs reported personal fears, 
walking long distances, and beneficiaries’ non-cooperation as challenges.
Source: Avula, R., P.H. Nguyen, S. Ashok, S. Bajaj, S. Kachwaha, A. Pant, M. Walia, 
A. Singh, A. Paul, A. Singh, B. Kulkarni, D. Singhania, J.E. Alegria, L.F. Augustine, 
M. Khanna, M. Krishna, N. Sundaravathanam, P.K. Nayak, P.K. Sharma, P. Makkar, P. 
Ghosh, S. Mala, S. Jain, S.K. Banjara, S. Nair, S. Ghosh, S. Das, S. Patil, T. Mahapatra, 
T. Forissier, T.N. Lewis, P. Nanda, S. Krishnan, andP. Menon. 2021. “India’s 2.42 million 
frontline health workers enable restoration of health and nutrition service delivery 
after early COVID-19 lockdowns: An observational study.” Unpublished, International 
Food Policy Research Institute.
5.2 MATERNAL AND CHILD HEALTH SERVICES
There were disruptions to maternal and child health services delivered by the Departments 
of Health during the pandemic. With the spread of COVID-19 virus, health care facilities and 
frontline workers have primarily been involved in providing care to the COVID-19 affected 
patients. However, to ensure the continuation of critical services at States/UTs irrespective 
of COVID Status, the MoHFW has issued two guidance documents to the States/UTs viz. 
enabling delivery of essential health services, including services to pregnant women. While 
the first document provided provision of RMNCH+A (Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, 
Child and Adolescent) services with special focus, the second document mentioned that 
under no circumstances should there be a denial of essential services.
We examined disruptions and policy adaptations pertaining to interventions during 
pregnancy period, postnatal period, and early childhood periods were assessed to 
evaluate the toll of the pandemic on maternal and child health services.
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?
69
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
5.2.1 Disruptions to service delivery and policy adaptations
Following the national guidance on essential maternal and child services, in April, several 
states issued guidelines to provide antenatal care (ANC) services for on-demand and 
walk-in beneficiaries at health facilities or to provide services only in some areas or 
using mobile units for caring for pregnant women in migrant camps. Overall, only a few 
States issued guidance on deworming during pregnancy. Only Bihar and Maharashtra 
had early guidance on deworming by May 2020. Guidance on institutional deliveries 
was available by May 2020 in 6 of 13 States. Following the national guidelines, a few 
States issued guidelines to ensure safe institutional deliveries at all health facilities and 
maintain due list of expected delivery dates for all pregnant women. Guidelines to provide 
IFA supplements to pregnant and lactating women were issued in May 2020. States 
provided IFA supplements either through home visits or through on-demand at health 
facilities. A few states ensured delivery of IFA supplements to migrant workers visiting 
the state due to the lockdown. By May 2020, guidance on provision of neonatal tetanus 
protection was available in 11 of the 13 States. States issued guidelines to provide on-
demand immunisation services at health centres at the community-level and through the 
outreach sessions.
For interventions during the early childhood period, guidelines were available in May 
2020. Services like IFA supplementation and health check-up for SAM children were fully 
functional across most states. Growth monitoring and immunisation services showed a 
mixed picture with Gujarat completely suspending growth monitoring. Immunization was 
either fully functional or partly available in 12 out of 13 states. Vitamin A supplementation 
and provision of ORS/Zinc were fully implemented in few states and information is not 
available for the remaining states.
State Interventions during pregnancy & postnatal period 
Antenatal care Deworming 
during 
pregnancyInstitutional 
deliveries IFA supplemen -
tationNeonatal 
tetanus 
protection May 
Aug
Sep/
Oct
May 
Aug
Sep/
Oct
May 
Aug
Sep/
Oct
May 
Aug
Sep/
Oct
May 
Aug
Sep/
Oct
Andhra Pradesh                              
Assam                              
Bihar                              
Chhattisgarh                              
Gujarat                              
Jharkhand                              
Karnataka                              
Madhya Pradesh                              
Maharashtra                              
Odisha                              
Rajasthan                              
Uttar Pradesh                              
West Bengal                              
70
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?State Interventions during early childhood
Pediatric 
IFAGrowth 
monitoring Immuniza -
tionVitamin A 
supplemen -
tation Health check 
ups for SAM 
children ORS/Zinc 
during 
diarrhea May 
Aug
Sep/Oct
May 
Aug
Sep/Oct
May 
Aug
Sep/Oct
May 
Aug
Sep/Oct
May 
Aug
Sep/Oct
May 
Aug
Sep/Oct
Andhra Pradesh                            
Assam                            
Bihar                            
Chhattisgarh                            
Gujarat                            
Jharkhand                            
Karnataka                            
Madhya Pradesh                            
Maharashtra                            
Odisha                            
Rajasthan                            
Uttar Pradesh                            
West Bengal                            
No information  
Partly operational (i.e., for some groups of population or 
geographic restrictions)  
Fully operational  
Service suspended  
 
Figure 26: Policy guidance for interventions during pregnancy, postnatal and early 
childhood period
5.2.2  Insights on disruption and restoration of interventions delivered 
by the health system during COVID-19 Pandemic
Seven key interventions across the continuum of care were selected for an analysis of 
disruptions and restorations. These include:
1. Number of pregnant women who were given 180 IFA tablets;
2. Number of pregnant women who received 4 or more ANC check-ups;
3. Number of institutional deliveries conducted (including C-Sections);
4. Women receiving 1st post-partum check-up between 48 hours and 14 days;
5. Number of newborns who received 6 HBNC visits after institutional delivery;
6. Number of children 9-11 months of age who received full immunisation;
7. Number of severely underweight children provided health check-up (0-5 years).
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?
71
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Section 2.5.2 details the methodology used for assessing disruption and restoration for 
five quarters—that is, from October-December 2019 to October-December 2020 at the 
national- and state-levels. The periods were divided into pre-pandemic period (October-
December 2019), disruption period (April-June 2020), early restoration period (July-
September 2020) and restoration period (October-December 2020).
Key findings on changes in the coverage of pregnant women who received 180+ IFA 
tablets and pregnant women who received four or more ANC check-ups
The number of pregnant women who received 180+ IFA tablets and the number of 
pregnant women who received four or more ANC visits declined post-March 2020 to 
lower than the pre-pandemic period by 13% and 24%, respectively (Figure 27). However, 
the coverage of these services improved significantly post-June 2020, such that the 
coverage of IFA and ANC visits was only slightly lower than pre-pandemic levels. Over 
the entire period, the number of pregnant women who received IFA tablets exceeded 
the number of pregnant women who received four or more ANC visits.
Figure 27: Changes in number of pregnant women received full course of 180 IFA 
tablets, 4 or more ANC check-ups from October 2019 to December 2020
Source: HMIS publicly available data, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
At the state-level, the  number of pregnant women who received 180+ IFA tablets reduced 
in 19 States and UTs, where decline in Uttar Pradesh, Manipur, Delhi, and Chandigarh 
was highest (Figure 28). During the early restoration period (June-September 2020), 
IFA coverage improved in 13 States/UTs, which previously experienced disruptions in 
this area. Similarly, the situation further improved in October-December 2020 in many 
States, and 22 States and UTs had coverage more than pre-pandemic levels. Coverage, 
however, remained low in Manipur and Chandigarh. Data were not available for Ladakh 
for all periods; thus, it was excluded.
72
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?State/UTsDisruption  
(Q2 of 2020 to 
Q4 of 2019)Early 
restoration  
(Q3 of 2020 to 
Q4 of 2019)Restoration  
(Q4 of 2020 to 
Q4 of 2019)
Large StateAndhra Pradesh 114% 107% 129%
Assam 119% 107% 95%
Bihar 75% 100% 93%
Chhattisgarh 102% 101% 98%
Gujarat 106% 100% 100%
Haryana 99% 102% 101%
Himachal Pradesh 102% 107% 102%
Jharkhand 97% 106% 115%
Karnataka 94% 93% 105%
Kerala 81% 76% 78%
Madhya Pradesh 102% 108% 104%
Maharashtra 98% 93% 98%
Odisha 98% 97% 106%
Punjab 98% 101% 104%
Rajasthan 133% 145% 130%
Tamil Nadu 112% 103% 147%
Telangana 99% 82% 91%
Uttar Pradesh 55% 90% 92%
Uttarakhand 119% 123% 123%
West Bengal 91% 102% 97%
Small StateArunachal Pradesh 112% 125% 92%
Goa 78% 82% 80%
Manipur 61% 65% 60%
Meghalaya 106% 136% 115%
Mizoram 117% 122% 130%
Nagaland 127% 148% 135%
Sikkim 128% 123% 116%
Tripura 78% 80% 107%
Union 
TeritorriesAndaman & Nicobar 
Islands150% 118% 221%
Chandigarh 61% 78% 65%
Dadar Nagar Haveli & 
Daman and Diu79% 67% 86%
Delhi 53% 78% 144%
Jammu & Kashmir 147% 156% 158%
Lakshadweep 91% 97% 102%
Puducherry 99% 119% 108%
All India 87% 99% 103%
Key>= 100%
<100% and >= 75%
<75% and >= 50%
<75% and >= 25%
<25%
Figure 28: Disruption and restoration of number of pregnant women who received 
180+ IFA tablets, HMIS Data, October 2019-December 2020
Source: HMIS publicly available data, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?
73
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Compared with the pre-pandemic period, the number of pregnant women who received 
four or more ANC check-ups reduced in most States and UTs (30 out of 35 States/
UTs) (Figure 29). The largest decline was in Manipur, Nagaland, Delhi and Uttar Pradesh. 
Positively, in June-September 2020, 26 States and UTs that had reported a decline in the 
number of pregnant women attending ANC visits the previous quarter had improved. 
Among these, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan recovered to the 
pre-pandemic period. The situation further improved in October-December 2020 in many 
States, and 13 States and UTs were covering more than pre-pandemic levels. However, 
coverage remained low in Goa, Manipur, Nagaland, Chandigarh, Delhi and Jammu and 
Kashmir. Ladakh was excluded because data were not available for all periods.
74
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?State/UTsDisruption (Q2 
of 2020 to Q4 of 
2019)Early restoration 
(Q3 of 2020 to 
Q4 of 2019)Restoration (Q4 
of 2020 to Q4 of 
2019)
Large StateAndhra Pradesh 112% 111% 135%
Assam 62% 80% 90%
Bihar 62% 91% 93%
Chhattisgarh 92% 98% 97%
Gujarat 97% 101% 104%
Haryana 75% 93% 94%
Himachal Pradesh 85% 104% 102%
Jharkhand 67% 97% 108%
Karnataka 85% 86% 93%
Kerala 93% 89% 97%
Madhya Pradesh 88% 108% 107%
Maharashtra 96% 96% 97%
Odisha 95% 98% 107%
Punjab 82% 99% 95%
Rajasthan 83% 107% 107%
Tamil Nadu 109% 100% 112%
Telangana 80% 82% 90%
Uttar Pradesh 54% 86% 97%
Uttarakhand 87% 96% 102%
West Bengal 65% 92% 98%
Small StateArunachal Pradesh 71% 88% 95%
Goa 75% 75% 72%
Manipur 51% 45% 49%
Meghalaya 70% 99% 98%
Mizoram 80% 96% 107%
Nagaland 52% 60% 67%
Sikkim 92% 93% 94%
Tripura 78% 83% 92%
Union 
TeritorriesAndaman & Nicobar 
Islands103% 115% 122%
Chandigarh 62% 73% 65%
Dadar Nagar Haveli 
& Daman and Diu73% 75% 82%
Delhi 52% 75% 71%
Jammu & Kashmir 57% 57% 62%
Lakshadweep 103% 94% 111%
Puducherry 113% 141% 167%
All India 76% 93% 99%
Key>= 100%
<100% and >= 75%
<75% and >= 50%
<75% and >= 25%
<25%
Figure 29: Disruption and restoration of number of pregnant women who received four or more 
ANC visits, HMIS Data, October 2019-December 2020
Source: HMIS publicly available data, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?
75
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Key findings on changes in coverage of number of institutional deliveries 
conducted, and number of women receiving 1st post-partum check-up between 48 
hours and 14 days
The number of women who delivered in institutional facilities and received post-partum 
check-ups declined post-December 2019 (Figure 30). This decline continued until 
April 2020-June 2020, after which coverage of both services increased, yet remained 
slightly below the pre-pandemic level. By October-December 2020, nearly 5,348,000 
beneficiaries delivered in institutional facilities compared to the pre-pandemic levels 
of 5,498,000. Approximately 3,052,000 beneficiaries received postpartum check-ups 
between 48 hours – 14 days of birth, compared with the pre-pandemic levels of 3,131,000.
Figure 30: Changes in the number of institutional deliveries conducted and the 
number of women receiving the first post-partum check-up between 48 hours and 
14 days from October 2019 to December 2020
Source: HMIS publicly available data, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
The number of institutional deliveries conducted (including C-section) reduced in most 
States and UTs (32 out of 35 States/UTs) compared with the pre-pandemic period (Figure 
31). The largest decline was in Bihar and Chandigarh. In June-September 2020, there was 
an improvement 29 States and UTs, which experienced a reduction in previous quarter. 
Among these, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Sikkim, and 
Jammu and Kashmir were able to restore to the pre-pandemic level. Similarly, the situation 
further improved in October-December 2020 in many States, and 10 States and UTs 
were covering more than pre-pandemic levels. The coverage remained low in Manipur, 
Chandigarh, Delhi, and Puducherry, whereas other States and UTs were covering more 
than 75% of the pre-pandemic level. Data were unavailable for Ladakh for all periods; 
thus, Ladakh was excluded from this analysis.
76
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?State/UTsDisruption (Q2 
of 2020 to Q4 
of 2019)Early 
restoration (Q3 
of 2020 to Q4 
of 2019)Restoration (Q4 
of 2020 to Q4 of 
2019)
Large StateAndhra Pradesh 90% 94% 100%
Assam 60% 81% 97%
Bihar 49% 84% 92%
Chhattisgarh 86% 99% 103%
Gujarat 72% 92% 99%
Haryana 69% 95% 96%
Himachal Pradesh 81% 103% 102%
Jharkhand 79% 99% 105%
Karnataka 90% 94% 100%
Kerala 100% 94% 95%
Madhya Pradesh 79% 105% 105%
Maharashtra 89% 95% 102%
Odisha 86% 87% 99%
Punjab 63% 94% 95%
Rajasthan 76% 107% 106%
Tamil Nadu 92% 92% 99%
Telangana 86% 89% 87%
Uttar Pradesh 53% 89% 96%
Uttarakhand 76% 105% 101%
West Benqal 76% 85% 91%
Small StateArunachal Pradesh 71% 95% 98%
Goa 84% 80% 85%
Manipur 68% 65% 68%
Meqhalaya 74% 91% 94%
Mizoram 72% 81% 96%
Nagaland 54% 62% 77%
Sikkim 96% 113% 120%
Tripura 78% 84% 92%
Union 
TeritorriesAndaman & Nicobar 
Islands106% 117% 123%
Chandigarh 50% 58% 57%
Dadar Nagar Haveli 
& Daman and Diu58% 68% 79%
Delhi 54% 68% 70%
Jammu & Kashmir 99% 104% 93%
Lakshadweep 120% 125% 121%
Puducherry 56% 56% 62%
All India 72% 92% 97%
Key>= 100%
<100% and >= 75%
<75% and >= 50%
<75% and >= 25%
<25%
Figure 31: Disruption and restoration of number of institutional deliveries conducted  
(including C-section), HMIS Data October 2019- December 2020
Source: HMIS publicly available data, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?
77
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
At the State-level, the number of women who received postpartum check-ups reduced  
in 30 out of 34 States and UTs compared with the pre-pandemic period (Figure 32). 
The maximum decline was in Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Chandigarh, Delhi, and Lakshadweep. 
During the early restoration period (June-September 2020), there was an improvement in 
27 States and UTs where services were disrupted in previous period. States and UTs like 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Meghalaya, Jammu and Kashmir, 
and Lakshadweep were able to restore to the pre-pandemic level. During the fourth 
quarter of 2020 (October-December 2020), coverage increased in 26 States and UTs 
compared with the early restoration period, and coverage was higher than pre-pandemic 
levels in 17 States and UTs. Coverage remained low in Kerala, Manipur, Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands, and Delhi. Data were unavailable for Ladakh for all periods and Tamil 
Nadu was an outlier; hence, they were excluded.
Key findings on changes in coverage of number of fully immunized children 9-11 
months of age, number of newborns who received 6 HBNC visits, and number of 
severely underweight children aged (0-5 years) provided health check-up
Health services to children including full-immunisation to children between 9-11 months 
and six home-based newborn care (HBNC) visits after institutional delivery declined post-
December 2019, whereas providing health check-ups to severely underweight children 
reduced only after March 2020 (Figure 33). In April-June 2020, full immunisation of 
children reduced by 24%; HBNC visits reduced by 29%; and health check-ups of severely 
underweight children reduced by 33% compared with the October-December 2019 pre-
pandemic period. Post-June 2020, the delivery of all three services to children improved 
and exceeded the pre-pandemic levels for HBNC visits and health check-ups for severely 
underweight children by December 2020. The provision of full immunisation dropped 
post-September 2020, which resulted in slightly lower level by December 2020 compared 
with pre-pandemic levels (6,247,000 vs 63,03,000). The reduction in rate of immunization 
may have resulted due to hesitancy among caregivers to take care of children to healthcare 
facilities due to fear of exposure to COVID-19 and further engagement and over burdening 
of health care workers in COVID response had affected the coverage.
78
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?State/UTsDisruption  
(Q2 of 2020 to 
Q4 of 2019)Early 
restoration  
(Q3 of 2020 to 
Q4 of 2019)Restoration  
(Q4 of 2020 to 
Q4 of 2019)
Large StateAndhra Pradesh 100% 107% 123%
Assam 57% 77% 91%
Bihar 43% 78% 91%
Chhattisgarh 86% 99% 101%
Gujarat 69% 89% 96%
Haryana 69% 96% 98%
Himachal Pradesh 82% 102% 103%
Jharkhand 78% 100% 108%
Karnataka 90% 96% 104%
Kerala 77% 73% 69%
Madhya Pradesh 106% 140% 143%
Maharashtra 87% 95% 96%
Odisha 91% 92% 102%
Punjab 66% 95% 98%
Rajasthan 74% 117% 114%
Telangana 118% 122% 135%
Uttar Pradesh 46% 79% 91%
Uttarakhand 92% 143% 142%
West Bengal 65% 84% 93%
Small StateArunachal Pradesh 121% 190% 177%
Goa 86% 76% 80%
Manipur 58% 58% 51%
Meghalaya 95% 112% 114%
Mizoram 55% 75% 96%
Nagaland 79% 89% 113%
Sikkim 78% 105% 108%
Tripura 86% 95% 114%
Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands52% 74% 62%
Union 
TeritorriesChandigarh 39% 85% 86%
Dadar Nagar Haveli & 
Daman and Diu61% 83% 175%
Delhi 40% 46% 54%
Jammu & Kashmir 98% 103% 93%
Lakshadweep 5% 119% 120%
Puducherry 83% 88% 82%
All India 70% 89% 97%
Key>= 100%
<100% and >= 75%
<75% and >= 50%
<75% and >= 25%
<25%
Figure 32: Disruption and restoration of number of women who received postpartum 
check-ups between 48 hours and 14 days, HMIS Data, October 2019-December 2020
Source: HMIS publicly available data, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?
79
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Figure 33: Changes in number of children who received fully immunized (9-11 months), 
6 HBNC visits (newborns), and health check-up (severely underweighted children 0-5 
years) from October 2019 to December 2020.
Source: HMIS publicly available data, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
The number of children (9-11 months) who are fully immunized  reduced in 28 out of 35 
States and UTs, compared to the pre-pandemic period (Figure 34). Bihar, Jharkhand, 
Uttar Pradesh, Sikkim and Delhi reported the largest decline. In June-September 2020, 
there was an increase in fully immunized children in 27 States and UTs, where there 
was a decline in previous period. However, the coverage declined slightly by the fourth 
quarter (October -December 2020) in 23 States and UTs due to which the total number 
of children fully vaccinated reduced by 1% at the national-level during the fourth quarter 
of 2020. Data were not available for Ladakh for all periods; therefore, data on Ladakh 
have been excluded.
80
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?State/UTsDisruption (Q2 
of 2020 to Q4 
of 2019)Early 
restoration (Q3 
of 2020 to Q4 
of 2019)Restoration (Q4 
of 2020 to Q4 of 
2019)
Large StateAndhra Pradesh 109% 114% 104%
Assam 76% 94% 100%
Bihar 64% 100% 100%
Chhattisgarh 87% 100% 99%
Gujarat 92% 110% 103%
Haryana 89% 103% 99%
Himachal Pradesh 106% 110% 101%
Jharkhand 70% 103% 104%
Karnataka 90% 105% 107%
Kerala 102% 93% 98%
Madhya Pradesh 91% 110% 101%
Maharashtra 84% 99% 102%
Odisha 99% 108% 116%
Punjab 104% 110% 102%
Rajasthan 83% 100% 87%
Tamil Nadu 98% 101% 93%
Telangana 98% 138% 96%
Uttar Pradesh 48% 86% 97%
Uttarakhand 95% 103% 109%
West Bengal 78% 113% 98%
Small StateArunachal Pradesh 94% 102% 96%
Goa 95% 100% 92%
Manipur 76% 82% 92%
Meghalaya 98% 115% 101%
Mizoram 94% 104% 100%
Nagaland 76% 108% 103%
Sikkim 68% 57% 67%
Tripura 77% 93% 100%
Union 
TeritorriesAndaman & Nicobar 
Islands108% 106% 101%
Chandigarh 83% 102% 87%
Dadar Nagar Haveli 
& Daman and Diu82% 103% 94%
Delhi 54% 97% 83%
Jammu & Kashmir 86% 95% 99%
Lakshadweep 113% 129% 104%
Puducherry 121% 118% 94%
All India 76% 100% 99%
Key>= 100%
<100% and >= 75%
<75% and >= 50%
<75% and >= 25%
<25%
Figure 34: Disruption and restoration of number of children (9-11 months) fully 
immunised, HMIS Data, October 2019-December 2020
Source: HMIS publicly available data, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?
81
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
At the State-level, the number of newborns who received HBNC visits reduced in most 
States and UTs (27 out of 34 States/UTs) compared with the pre-pandemic period of 
October-December 2019 (Figure 35). Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and Delhi reported the largest 
decline in this indicator. During the early restoration period (June-September 2020), 24 
States and UTs where HBNC visits were disrupted had since improved the coverage. 
Encouragingly, Jharkhand, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Meghalaya and Chandigarh restored coverage to pre-pandemic levels by June-
September 2020. Similarly, HBNC visits further increased in 28 States and UTs due to 
which the coverage surpassed the pre-pandemic levels at the national level in fourth 
quarter of 2020. While the coverage remained low in Goa, and Delhi. Data were not 
available for Dadar and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu for all periods and Tamil Nadu 
was an outlier, hence these large states were excluded.
The number of severely underweight children who received health check-up were 
disrupted in 25 out of 34 States and UTs, compared to pre-pandemic period. However, the 
provision of the service improved substantially in June-September 2020 in 22 States and 
UTs, where there were disruptions earlier. Consequently, the services were able to restore 
to the pre-pandemic period in the third quarter of 2020. There was a slight decrease 
in health check-ups in October-December 2020, yet the coverage remained above pre-
pandemic levels. States and UTs like Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Delhi, Sikkim, Tripura, 
and Uttarakhand had the least coverage in quarter four of 2020 (October- December 
2020), compared to the pre-pandemic period. Data were not available for Ladakh for 
all periods and Tamil Nadu was an outlier; hence; these States have been excluded from 
this analysis.
82
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?State/UTsDisruption  
(Q2 of 2020 to 
Q4 of 2019)Early 
restoration  
(Q3 of 2020 to 
Q4 of 2019)Restoration  
(Q4 of 2020 to 
Q4 of 2019)
Large StateAndhra Pradesh 110% 113% 139%
Assam 69% 73% 98%
Bihar 49% 84% 95%
Chhattisgarh 84% 98% 103%
Gujarat 75% 95% 104%
Haryana 77% 87% 122%
Himachal Pradesh 83% 94% 108%
Jharkhand 81% 109% 116%
Karnataka 124% 120% 135%
Kerala 89% 116% 88%
Madhya Pradesh 92% 132% 148%
Maharashtra 85% 100% 113%
Odisha 92% 98% 105%
Punjab 70% 85% 98%
Rajasthan 81% 110% 111%
Telangana 90% 96% 117%
Uttar Pradesh 49% 91% 113%
Uttarakhand 78% 96% 127%
West Bengal 61% 85% 101%
Small StateArunachal Pradesh 92% 121% 139%
Goa 174% 16% 11%
Manipur 64% 69% 83%
Meghalaya 96% 123% 133%
Mizoram 121% 124% 146%
Nagaland 71% 90% 102%
Sikkim 97% 92% 110%
Tripura 80% 90% 111%
Union 
TeritorriesAndaman & Nicobar 
Islands138% 219% 225%
Chandigarh 87% 114% 101%
Dadar Nagar Haveli 
& Daman and Diu92% 90% 106%
Delhi 24% 29% 55%
Jammu & Kashmir 91% 98% 94%
Lakshadweep 106% 133% 106%
Puducherry 105% 109% 126%
All India 71% 95% 111%
Key>= 100%
<100% and >= 75%
<75% and >= 50%
<75% and >= 25%
<25%
Figure 35: Disruption and restoration of number of newborns who received 6 HBNC visits after 
institutional delivery, HMIS Data October 2019-December 2020
Source: HMIS publicly available data, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?
83
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
State/UTsDisruption  
(Q2 of 2020 to 
Q4 of 2019)Early 
restoration  
(Q3 of 2020 to 
Q4 of 2019)Restoration  
(Q4 of 2020 to 
Q4 of 2019)
Large StateAndhra Pradesh 134% 284% 202%
Assam 45% 97% 69%
Bihar 129% 223% 177%
Chhattisgarh 62% 188% 106%
Gujarat 48% 104% 57%
Haryana 149% 139% 211%
Himachal Pradesh 14% 18% 8%
Jharkhand 33% 99% 139%
Karnataka 55% 164% 84%
Kerala 120% 148% 127%
Madhya Pradesh 107% 183% 211%
Maharashtra 63% 81% 85%
Odisha 72% 82% 77%
Punjab 85% 130% 98%
Rajasthan 45% 85% 112%
Telangana 194% 182% 456%
Uttar Pradesh 27% 69% 81%
Uttarakhand 21% 46% 49%
West Bengal 30% 38% 62%
Small StateArunachal Pradesh 2% 2% 189%
Goa 2% 15% 85%
Manipur 200% 80% 620%
Meghalaya 54% 104% 76%
Mizoram 71% 3% 23%
Nagaland 10% 35% 126%
Sikkim 471% 17% 48%
Tripura 30% 52% 40%
Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands22% 50% 58%
Union 
TeritorriesChandigarh 59% 37% 51%
Dadar Nagar Haveli & 
Daman and Diu64% 89% 296%
Delhi 33% 39% 23%
Jammu & Kashmir 57% 76% 99%
Lakshadweep 250% 250% 150%
Puducherry 44% 405% 74%
All India 67% 112% 110%
Key>= 100%
<100% and >= 75%
<75% and >= 50%
<75% and >= 25%
<25%
Figure 36: Disruption and restoration of number of severely underweighted children (0-5 years) 
who received health check-ups, HMIS Data, October 2019- December 2020
Source: HMIS publicly available data, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
84
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?Overall, services like pregnant women who received 180+ IFA and children (9-11 months) 
fully immunized experienced least disruption compared to other services. While, severely 
underweighted children who received health check-up declined significantly in April-
June 2020. Encouragingly, the coverage of IFA to pregnant women, HBNC visits, and 
health check-up for severely underweight children were restored and exceeded the pre-
pandemic coverage. Other services including four or more ANC, institutional delivery, 
post-partum check-ups, and child immunisation were unable to reach the pre-pandemic 
level, but it is noteworthy that their coverage was more than 95% of the pre-pandemic 
period. However, despite restorations, the pre-pandemic levels of coverage of these health 
services in many states were sub-optimal, and NFHS-5 reveals several coverage gaps.
5.2.3  State innovations in delivering health services (core POSHAN 
Abhiyaan interventions)
States adopted different strategies to continue service delivery during COVID-19, which 
varied by geography and by the type of service. Out of the 34 states for which state data 
was received, 26 states/UTs reported making some innovations to ensure the delivery of 
health interventions to the beneficiaries during the COVID-19 pandemic. The table below 
summarises the state-wise innovation, by services.
Table 7: Summary of health programme delivery innovations in the context of 
COVID-19, as reported by State Governments
State/UTsInnovations for 
distribution 
of IFA (syrup, 
pink, red, blue)Innovations 
for 
distribution 
of ORS and 
zinc Innovations for 
immunisationInnovations for 
counselling
Andaman 
& Nicobar 
IslandsMobilization of 
beneficiaries
Andhra 
PradeshDuring IDCF 
2020Token based system 
to prevent crowd
Arunachal 
PradeshTracking system to 
monitor status Virtual counselling, 
distribution of 
material
AssamHome 
distributionDuring IDCF 
2020During VHNDsUse of mobile 
phones
BiharHome 
distribution
Chandigarh By FLWsDuring IDCF 
2020
ChhattisgarhHome 
distributionHome 
distributionMobilization of 
beneficiaries
DNH & DD
DelhiHome 
distributionHome 
distributionHome visits 
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?
85
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
State/UTsInnovations for 
distribution 
of IFA (syrup, 
pink, red, blue)Innovations 
for 
distribution 
of ORS and 
zinc Innovations for 
immunisationInnovations for 
counselling
Goa
GujaratHome 
distributionDuring IDCF 
2020 & home 
distribution
HaryanaHome 
distributionDuring IDCF 
2020Home visits
Himachal 
PradeshHome 
distributionDuring IDCF 
2020Virtual trainings 
to handle vaccine 
among COVID-19
Jammu & 
KashmirHome 
distribution & 
during VHNDsMobilization of 
beneficiaries Mobile 
applications and 
home visits
JharkhandCommunity 
based, virtual 
trainings for 
FLWsCommunity 
basedWall writing Virtual counselling 
KarnatakaVirtual training 
sessions conducted.
Outreach sessions 
organized 
KeralaAt AWC for 
out-of-schoolDecentralized 
ORS depotsPre-book 
appointments to 
prevent crowdTele-counselling 
through toll-free 
number
LadakhHome 
distributionHome 
distributionMobilization of 
beneficiaries
Lakshadweep
Madhya 
PradeshHome 
distribution & 
tele-monitoring 
to ensure 
availabilityVirtual training 
sessions conducted.In-person small 
groups
MaharashtraHome 
distributionHome 
distribution
ManipurMental health 
counselling to 
inmates of jails 
and old age 
homes
Meghalaya
Mizoram Incomplete template received 
NagalandHome 
distribution
Odisha During IDCF 
2020
86
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?State/UTsInnovations for 
distribution 
of IFA (syrup, 
pink, red, blue)Innovations 
for 
distribution 
of ORS and 
zinc Innovations for 
immunisationInnovations for 
counselling
PuducherryCommunity 
based By FLWsMobilization of 
beneficiaries
PunjabHome 
distributionConducted 
maintaining 
COVID-19 protocol Through mobile 
phones & home 
visits 
Rajasthan
SikkimHome 
distributionHome 
distributionConducted 
maintaining 
COVID-19 protocolThrough mobile 
phones & home 
visits 
Tamil Nadu
Telangana
Tripura
Uttar PradeshIFA distribution 
combined with 
Vitamin A
Uttarakhand
West Bengal Template not received
Source: Reported by states in response to questionnaires sent by NITI Aayog in Sept 2020
Note: IDCF-Intensified Diarrhoea Control Fortnight
Distribution of IFA (syrup, pink, red, blue)
Several states opted for home distribution of IFA. Few states delivered IFA during 
community-based events, VHSNDs and through FLWs. Kerala provided IFA at AWCs 
for out-of-school children. Madhya Pradesh ensured the availability of IFA through tele-
monitoring. In Uttar Pradesh, the distribution of IFA syrup was combined with bi-annual 
Vitamin A supplementation to ensure distribution to all beneficiaries and for reporting 
purposes.
Distribution of ORS and zinc
Seven states ensured the implementation of Intensified Diarrhoea Control Fortnight 2020 
for children under-five years of age. In a few states, ORS and zinc were distributed at 
beneficiaries’ homes or at the community-level. Kerala decentralized the ORS depots from 
AWC to the level of one household for every 10 houses in a community.
Immunization
Several adaptations were made by States to provide immunisation to beneficiaries 
ranging from identifying alternate sites for immunisation, following a staggered approach, 
maintaining COVID-19 protocol, providing information and guidance to FLWs to conduct 
immunisations using technology.
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?
87
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Counselling
States used different approaches to reach beneficiaries to ensure the most vulnerable 
population received the services and most of the beneficiaries were covered. Use of 
mobile phones, virtual and tele counselling and home visits were some of the adaptations 
made to ensure that counselling services reach the beneficiaries.
5.3  MULTI-SECTORAL INVOLVEMENT AND POLICY ACTION 
DURING COVID-19
Multiple ministries have been contributing in POSHAN Abhiyaan to address malnutrition 
through tackling its many determinants, and have taken concerted efforts to continue 
their regular activities to ensure that POSHAN Abhiyaan is being implemented despite 
the COVID-19-related disruptions. Similarly, development partners have also shifted their 
focus in undertaking initiatives for successful implementation of POSHAN Abhiyaan 
during the pandemic. This section summarises the measures taken by key Ministries and 
development partners in 2020.
5.3.1 Ministry of Women and Child Development
Best practices, during COVID-19 at the central-level
In the form of Advisories and other formal communications the MoWCD ensured the 
continuum of care to the beneficiaries even during the challenging COVID-19 times. For 
example, a letter (on 11 March 2020) was issued to all States/UTs in the view of the 
COVID-19 outbreak, which indicated that the AWWs and Supervisors should be utilized 
in surveillance and other community-level activities conducted by MoHFW, mobilization 
of the self-help groups (SHGs) to create awareness, and proper sanitation and health 
education to children and their parents. Furthermore, AWWs and helpers were also 
actively involved in conducting other activities during COVID-19, such as door-to-door 
surveys, community surveillance, etc. Another formal communication in the form of a DO 
letter on (19 May 2020) was issued to all States/UTs, which indicated that distribution of 
food items and nutrition support would be conducted by AWWs once every 15 days for 
beneficiaries (children, pregnant women and lactating mothers) to ensure continuity of 
the supplementary nutrition programme.
In view of COVID-19 context, the life cover for AWWs/Anganwadi helpers who are 51-59 
years of age was increased from ₹ 30,000/- to 2,00,000/- for a period of three months—
that is, up to 30 June 2020.
Additionally, many State-level initiatives were initiated amid COVID-19. One example 
recognized by MWCD is establishing nutri-gardens in Lakshadweep. In collaboration 
with the Departments of Women and Child Development, Agriculture Rural Development 
and Village Panchayats, Lakshadweep promoted Anganwadi Kitchen Gardens and Nutri-
Gardens for a continuous supply of green leafy vegetables and fruits during COVID-19 
outbreak.
88
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?5.3.2 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Best practices, especially during COVID-19 times
Continued support was provided to States and UTs through regular video conferences 
(VC) and webinars on the implementation of various interventions amid COVID-19, 
including AMB, newborn care provision in the special newborn care units (SNCUs), 
continuation of breastfeeding and promotion of IYCF practices, implementation of NDD 
and diarrhoea control and prevention activities, facility-based management of sick SAM 
children in NRCs. Guidance notes for undertaking various activities were prepared, and 
intensive awareness generation activities through social media, mid and mass media were 
also carried out.
5.3.3 Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
Best Practices, especially during COVID-19 times
Empowering migrant labourers through Garib Kalyan Rojgar Abhiyaan, Bihar
A total of 24 labourers were engaged in the construction of a community sanitary complex 
at Ward No. 8 of Tulapatti Gram Panchayat in Kishanpur Block of Supaul District in Bihar. 
The move was not only a step towards ensuring better community sanitation practices 
but also an assurance of employment to many migrants who had to return to Bihar due 
to COVID-19 outbreak. These migrants were provided with work under the Garib Kalyan 
Rojgar Abhiyaan.
5.3.4  Initiatives taken by Development Partners during COVID-19 
Pandemic
Strengthening the delivery of nutrition benefits and services in the context 
of COVID-19:
State-level government bodies in the States of Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Uttar Pradesh, and Rajasthan developed a joint recommendation note and supported 
implementation to strengthen the delivery of nutrition services in the context of COVID-19. 
Organizations like Alive and Thrive (A&T) in collaboration with WeCan has been actively 
participating in addressing nutrition-related issues, especially during the COVID-19 
pandemic. A&T also collaborated with key development partners namely UNICEF, WHO, 
World Bank, National Centre of Excellence and Advance Research on Diets, and Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare for providing technical inputs in the design and development 
of social behaviour change communications for MIYCN during COVID-19.
In Bihar, A&T coordinated with State Health Society Bihar and remotely assessed the 
coverage of ASHA’s home visits and IYCF counselling including tele-counselling activities 
during the national lockdown in April 2020. The assessment was based on telephonic 
interviews by ASHA facilitators using a standard checklist, which was later analysed by 
A&T. Similarly, A&T conducted telephonic interviews with frontline workers, pregnant 
women, and women with children below 2 years in Uttar Pradesh for examining the 
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?
89
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
effects of COVID-19 on provision and use of health and nutrition services during and 
after lockdown.
Promoting community involvement for improving health and nutrition related 
outcomes in Aspirational Districts during COVID-19 times
The onset of COVID-19 and subsequent lockdowns have resulted in a halt in many health 
and nutrition activities for children as the AWCs were closed. This severely impacted 
the feeding practices and initiation of complementary feeding, due to which the District 
administration along with Piramal Foundation decided to organize events such as 
Annaprasan Divas and Godbharai Divas at the houses of the beneficiary itself to avoid 
gatherings of beneficiaries. The initiative was introduced in the Aspirational District of 
Sitamarhi, Bihar.  After devising the guidelines and protocols to be followed, the AWWs 
were motivated to visit the beneficiaries houses for ensuring that nutrition and health are 
receiving adequate attention. Soon, the AWWs started home-based Annaprasan Divas for 
children who completed six months. At the event, the family prepares soft semi-solid food 
for the child to mark the celebration of Annaprasan Divas, and the AWW further counsel 
beneficiaries regarding the benefits of breastfeeding and complementary feeding. With 
the continued efforts of the FLWs, Block Transformation Officers (BTO), and District 
officials, the AWWs have been able to successfully organize Annaprasan Divas in 275 
households, and Godbharai Divas in 210 households.
District Administration intervened by setting up ‘Nutri Gardens’ at CHC and AWC with 
Piramal Foundation where the beneficiaries had access to some fruits and vegetables 
grown in the garden and were taught about the nutritional value of different fruits and 
vegetables, and finally encouraged to adopt practicing kitchen gardens within their 
households. Additionally, the project is a self-sustaining project which ensures access to 
healthy fruits and vegetables in an affordable way as most inputs are available locally, and 
villagers do not require any additional skills for setting up the ‘Nutri Garden’ due to their 
existing engagement in farming. So far, five Anganwadi sites in the Aspirational District 
Chitrakoot, Uttar Pradesh  have been developed functional gardens where beneficiaries 
visit regularly. Over 300 pregnant women and 280 lactating mothers have visited the 
gardens and have been counselled on improving their dietary intakes.
In Sonbhadra, Uttar Pradesh the DM District Administration along with the technical 
support of the Piramal Foundation undertook the decision utilizing the District Mineral 
Funds for purchasing growth monitoring tools for the AWC. In total, 95 lakh were used 
to purchase 8,500 growth monitoring tools, including stadiometers, infantometers, baby 
weighing machines, adult weighing machines, and MUAC tapes. After procurement, a 
series of trainings were conducted to ensure the efficient usage of the tools. Throughout 
the process, capacity building of 72 ICDS supervisors and CDPO on the use of growth 
monitoring tools were conducted, and 1653 AWWs were installed with growth monitoring 
equipment. There has been a significant increase in the growth monitoring of the children, 
and even during the COVID-19 pandemic, 1,45,140 children were monitored. Additionally, 
children who were identified as severely acutely malnourished were referred to the 
Nutritional Rehabilitation Centres for recovery. Finally, the strategy detects early growth 
retardation so that appropriate steps can be taken for the same.
90
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?Field-level relief measures during the COVID-19 pandemic
The c entralised kitchens programme in Nashik and Palghar, which is run in collaboration 
with the Tribal Development Department, Government of Maharashtra and TATA trusts, has 
expanded its services to provide meals to migrant workers amid the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Since 3 April 2020, the kitchen in Palghar has been providing hot meals and dry rations 
to stranded migrants in the shelter camps in Tawa and Talasari blocks. More than 67,000 
meals have been served, where around 5,000 people are being served cooked meals 
each day, and over 400 kilograms worth of dry ration that includes flour, pulses, oil, and 
spices has been distributed. Similarly, in Nashik, 2,800 dry ration kits were distributed 
in a week’s time to approximately 2,800 families with the collaborative efforts of Trusts, 
BAIF and Tata AIG volunteers.
Similarly, to address the challenges in the availability of food and nutrition amid the 
COVID-19 pandemic, relief initiatives for the vulnerable communities across India were 
undertaken. Under the relief operation, the Tata Trusts combined forces with the associate 
organisation The India Nutrition Initiative (TINI) to distribute packets of GoMo, a healthy 
legume-based ready-to-eat snack. As yellow pea is the main ingredient, the snack is 
rich in protein and fiber, and has been fortified with micronutrients. The packets were 
distributed across critical pockets, such as slums, construction sites, cancer treatment 
hospitals, migrant settlements, primitive tribal hamlets in remote parts of the country, etc. 
Besides, the snack was also distributed to the country’s frontline workers namely police 
personnel, healthcare workers, etc. Around 44 non-governmental organization (NGO) 
partners freely distributed around 1.7 million GoMo packets across 700,000 households in 
over 30 Districts in nine States- Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, 
Delhi, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Haryana, and Tamil Nadu.
Capacity building of frontline workers in COVID-19 pandemic
To bring the visibility through the month-long celebration of POSHAN Maah, the network 
of Centres of Excellence for SAM comprising of the National Centre of Excellence (NCoE-
SAM) and State Centre of Excellences for management of SAM (SCoE-SAM) under the 
Government leadership and guidance from UNICEF, joined hands to accelerate SAM 
management-related activities during September 2020.
NCoE-SAM and SCoE-SAM conducted various training programmes in many States to 
build capacity for identifying children with SAM, adhering to the infection prevention 
and control from the COVID-19 pandemic protocol. In Bihar , SCoE along with Piramal 
Foundation conducted training on identification and referral of SAM in 5 Aspirational 
Districts. On the other hand, in Chhattisgarh  SCoE, All India Medical Institute of Science 
(AIIMS), Raipur conducted telephonic follow-ups of the discharged children from NRCs 
and counselled the parents regarding the identification of danger signs in children, home-
based nutrition and care, and signs and symptoms of COVID-19 and preventive measures. 
In Jharkhand , a four-day State-level training was conducted to build the capacity and 
orient the medical college faculties and students, District officials of West Singhbhumand 
and development partners on the comprehensive community-based management of 
children with SAM programme. Similarly, online trainings and orientations were conducted 
for frontline workers under ICDS in Odisha and Rajasthan .
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?
91
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Technical Support: CoE has also provided technical support in the preparation of guidelines 
and training modules in Rajasthan  for their project AMMA, and support was also provided 
to ICDS Department of Bihar  for developing a comprehensive guidance note on activities 
regarding early screening of SAM at a community and facility level under the Health 
Department. Additionally, an expert consultation was held with the district administration 
of West Singhbhum for implementation of the CMAM programme in the district adhering 
to the infection prevention and control from COVID-19 protocols.
5.4 CONCLUSION AND WAY FORWARD
This chapter examined the impact of the pandemic on service disruptions and documented 
various ways in which services are beginning to be restored across sectors in India.
The findings on service disruptions, drawing primarily on publicly available administrative 
data highlight substantial disruptions in the early part of the pandemic, with restorations 
beginning to be apparent in the middle of 2020.
The findings on early restorations and adaptations to service delivery are promising and 
highlight a positive commitment across all levels – policy, implementation and frontline- to 
attempt to restore essential services in health, nutrition and social safety nets. A range of 
adaptations to service delivery are seen across specific platforms and interventions, and 
these bode well for supporting the path to full restoration. At the same time, available 
findings on the broader economic impacts of the pandemic highlight that poor families 
are likely to need a wide range of social protection and economic support for improving 
food security and care for pregnant and lactating women and young children in the 
critical 1000-day window.
What implications do these findings have for India’s progress on improving nutrition?
 ÂFirst, millions of babies born in 2020 have likely missed several essential 
interventions in health and nutrition; therefore, the rapid and full restoration 
of services is critical to the basic mission goal of delivering essential evidence-
based interventions. Efforts to increase household demand for services will also 
be central to achieving coverage. To this end, demand creation to access and use 
health and ICDS services should be a key focus of the SBCC pillar of POSHAN 
Abhiyaan in 2021.
 ÂSecond, the insight on economic and food distress suggests that social protection 
measures must be strengthened and will need to reach families in the 1,000-day 
period. Improving nutrition is challenging when families are in economic distress. 
Nutrition-sensitive social protection could play a key role in helping families 
provide better nutrition for their children.
 ÂThird, addressing the fall-out of the impact on the education sector on adolescent 
girls will be critical. Evidence has accumulated that education is critical to prevent 
early marriage, which in turn is critical to prevent early childbearing in India. The 
risks of increasing early marriage in the context of the pandemic are higher, 
but little is known about the extent of the challenge. Community engagement 
92
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?to ensure adolescent girls can return to school and that early marriages are 
prevented will, therefore, also need sharp focus in 2021. Additionally, RKSK may 
mobilize community to prevent early marriage of adolescent girls with the help 
of FLWs.
 ÂFourth, it is recommended that for providing convergence of WCD and Health 
services to fight undernutrition, the provision of seamless data sharing between 
ICDS-CAS/POSHAN Tracker and RCH should be developed. Additionally, 
conducting joint convergent trainings/activities with the field level staff on 
how to constantly share data and information is necessary for successful inter-
sectoral convergence.
 ÂFifth, all available services – whether special services in the context of the 
pandemic or routine services – should be reaching families in the first 1000 
days in a timely and targeted manner. At this time, little is known about how to 
achieve effective household convergence, but the evidence is strong that this is 
currently poor and therefore, must be a key goal for the efforts to strengthen 
the convergence pillar of POSHAN Abhiyaan.
Delivering POSHAN Abhiyaan Interventions during a Pandemic: How are States doing?
93
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Conclusions and 
Recommendations
6
This progress report has assessed the implementation of POSHAN Abhiyaan; analysed 
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on nutrition and health services and generated 
and curated insights on service delivery restorations and adaptations and other related 
needs across India.
First, on a positive note, the assessment of system readiness and capabilities to deliver 
POSHAN Abhiyaan interventions demonstrate improvements from the previous POSHAN 
Abhiyaan progress reports. Despite the improvement, challenges pertaining to low fund 
utilization, insufficient human resources, and gaps in training and capacity building of 
the staff. Additionally, the coverage of the service delivery has a mixed performance 
where many indicators have acceptable coverage, but few indicators are lagging behind. 
Together, these signal that although progress is along expected lines, but given the 
complex systems preparedness, focus on accelerating coverage of key interventions is 
required.
Key recommendations
 ÂClose all implementation system-related gaps in delivery of POSHAN Abhiyaan’s 
core components. These include accelerating the use of funds released for 
POSHAN Abhiyaan, ensuring adequate number of health facilities and supplies, 
ensuring that technology integration continues, and ensuring that capacity 
building of workers is focused both on coverage and quality.
 ÂMaximise convergence-related efforts in the coming years, targeting and focusing 
all efforts to achieve household convergence of key programs, especially those 
addressing the determinants that have been slow to move or negatively affected 
in 2020.
 ÂCreate an enabling environment for seamless data sharing between ICDS-CAS/
POSHAN Tracker and reproductive and child health (RCH) services to facilitate 
convergence between WCD and health services. Additionally, conducting joint 
convergent trainings/activities with field-level staff on how to constantly share 
data and information is also necessary.
95
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
 ÂWith the introduction of POSHAN Tracker, it can be utilised to monitor the 
supply and delivery of THR. The tracker must be integrated with the RCH portal 
to identify prevalence of malnutrition. All visits of AWWs should be tracked and 
best 100 AWWs per month in every state may be incentivized and their photos/
mobile numbers may be displayed on POSHAN tracker.
Second, the analysis of service disruptions, drawing primarily on administrative data 
highlights substantial disruptions in the early part of the pandemic. Although restorations 
are apparent beginning in the middle of 2020, the restorations in June 2020 (the last 
month for which data are available in public domain) indicate that full restoration to 
December 2019 levels are still not apparent for various services. However, in several 
states, it appears that higher reach of food supplements was achieved in the immediate 
post-lockdown period, and this may have important lessons.
Key recommendations
 ÂGiven the importance of achieving full-scale coverage of the POSHAN Abhiyaan 
core interventions, efforts to restore service delivery are imperative, not just 
to achieve pre-pandemic levels but to go beyond and achieve even greater 
coverage and quality.
 ÂServices that will need particular attention in the restoration of services will be 
screening and monitoring of growth of all children, active support to EBF and 
even greater efforts to support complementary feeding.
 ÂEfforts to increase household demand for services are also going to be central 
to achieving coverage; therefore, demand creation to access and use health 
and ICDS services should likely be a key focus of the SBCC pillar of POSHAN 
Abhiyaan in 2021.
Third, the findings on early restorations and adaptations to service delivery highlight a 
positive commitment across all levels–policy, implementation and frontline–to attempt to 
restore essential services in health, nutrition and social safety nets. A range of adaptations 
to service delivery across specific platforms and interventions bode well for supporting 
the path to full restoration. At the same time, available findings also highlight the broader 
economic impacts of the pandemic on incomes and food security, even as recently as 
October 2020. Addressing the fallout of the impact on the education sector on adolescent 
girls will also be critical. Evidence has accumulated that education is critical to prevent 
early marriage, which in turn is critical to prevent early childbearing in India. The risks of 
increasing early marriage in the context of the pandemic are higher, but little is known 
about the extent of the challenge.
Key recommendations
 ÂThe efforts for convergence with key sectors, especially food and civil supplies 
(PDS) and rural development (NREGA) will be essential for strengthening social 
protection to vulnerable families. This will also ensure that the social protection 
programmes reach families in the first 1,000 days of life. Furthermore, by 
96
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Conclusions and Recommendationsincorporating nutri-cereals, fortified rice, and other nutritious foods into social 
safety nets will help to make these provisions nutrition sensitive.
 ÂEfforts to strengthen social protection to be more nutrition-sensitive and to 
ensure that major social protection programmes reach families in the first 1000 
days using the convergence action planning mechanisms will be essential.
 ÂCommunity engagement to ensure adolescent girls can return to school and 
that early marriages are prevented will also warrant urgent attention in 2021.
Despite significant progress on strengthening systems to support the delivery of key 
POSHAN Abhiyaan interventions in the Health and WCD sectors, more work is needed 
to close persisting gaps. In addition, the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic mean that 
millions of babies born in 2020 have likely missed several essential interventions in 
health and nutrition. At the same time, there is also evidence of a broad system-wide 
commitment to nutrition in the range of efforts to restore health and nutrition services 
– across Ministries, States and development partners. The rapid and full restoration of 
services is critical to the core POSHAN Abhiyaan goal of delivering essential evidence-
based interventions to all women and children.
In closing, this report offers sobering insights on the current state of malnutrition in India, 
as well as several areas for optimism on the nutritional improvements underway in India. 
With continued political leadership, system-wide implementation commitment, society-
wide support and focused action, India can eliminate malnutrition in all forms.
In 2021, an estimated 20 million babies will be born in India6. By investing more deeply 
in solving the nutrition challenge, we have the power to assure the birth cohort of 2021 
tremendous opportunities to strengthen their potential as future citizens. There is no 
time to lose.
6  UNICEF Press Release, 7 May 2020
Conclusions and Recommendations
97
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
98
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Key Takeaways 
from POSHAN 
Abhiyaan
7
On 8 March 2018, the Honourable Prime Minister launched the POSHAN (Prime Minister’s 
Overarching Scheme for Holistic Nutrition) Abhiyaan, which brought malnutrition to the 
centre stage. Malnutrition, particularly in early life (especially during the first 1,000 days) 
leaves an undeniable mark on child growth and development and can have irreversible 
consequences. Globally, the success of nutrition programmes has been predicated on a 
strong commitment on the part of the political and bureaucratic leadership. POSHAN 
Abhiyaan, with political commitment from the highest level, created a conducive 
environment to improve nutrition, with particular attention on the first 1,000-day window 
of opportunity.
NITI Aayog has been involved in the conceptualization and monitoring of POSHAN 
Abhiyaan, since its inception. The launch of POSHAN Abhiyaan brought together 18 
ministries to synchronize their efforts for addressing direct and underlying determinants 
of malnutrition. The POSHAN Abhiyaan adopted a multi-pronged approach to target 
malnutrition. POSHAN Abhiyaan simultaneously also created an enabling environment 
through its key pillars– convergence, information and communication technology (ICT), 
monitoring, and Jan Andolan– to ensure coverage of high quality services through the first 
two years of a child’s life. Since its inception, the POSHAN Abhiyaan has created mass 
awareness and generated a spirited environment wherein all actors in the government 
and society are engaged to overcome malnutrition.
The experience of implementing the POSHAN Abhiyaan over the past three years has 
highlighted the  following key lessons that must be carried forward to continue our efforts 
for reducing malnutrition:
LESSON 1: POSHAN ABHIYAAN HAS HELPED TO BRING A STRONG 
FOCUS ON IMPROVING NUTRITION OUTCOMES DURING THE FIRST 
1,000 DAYS.
The first 1,000 days—the time approximately from conception to the second birthday of 
the child, constitute the foundation period for optimal child health, growth and neural 
99
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
development. The sensitive periods of brain development are susceptible to specific 
nutritional deficiencies that could have long-term deficits. This is the period when children 
require food with optimal nutrients, hygienic, nurturing and stimulating environments 
along with optimal health care. Poor nutrition during this critical phase has consequences 
throughout the lifecycle leading to delays in development, low earnings in adulthood, 
and increased risk for chronic diseases as well as negatively influence next generations.
POSHAN Abhiyaan shifted the focus of nutrition programmes from merely distributing 
food supplements to actively engaging all other stakeholders both on demand and 
supply side . With the clear focus on improving the coverage of key health and nutrition 
interventions, POSHAN Abhiyaan has contributed to laying a clear focus on:
 ÂIncentivizing Early Registration and Complete Antenatal Care
 ÂPromoting Institutional Deliveries
 ÂAnaemia Prevention and management
 ÂHealthy diets during pregnancy
 ÂEarly and Exclusive Breastfeeding
 ÂIntroducing Timely and Age appropriate Complementary Feeding, including a 
focus on the quality of take home rations in the ICDS
 ÂPromoting Dietary Diversity
 ÂHome visits to New-born and young child Care
 ÂKangaroo Mother Care and Optimal Feeding of low birth weight and small babies
 ÂIntroduction of Rota virus vaccine and zinc supplementation along with ORS to 
achieve zero diarrhoeal deaths
 ÂIntroduction of Pnemono-coccal vaccine (in selected states) for upper respiratory 
tract infections
 ÂGrowth monitoring for early identification and management of MAM/SAM 
children in the community
The assessments of system readiness and capabilities to deliver POSHAN Abhiyaan 
interventions demonstrated improvements and there is an overall positive trend in the 
coverage of interventions in most states. Taken together, these signal that progress is along 
expected lines given the complex systems preparedness and the focus on accelerating 
coverage of key interventions in the period between 2018 and 2020.
Gaps remain in service delivery and coverage. Geographically targeted diagnostic 
analyses and related action are critical to close existing gaps in the reach of health and 
ICDS interventions in the first 1000 days. In addition, ensuring strong linkages between 
counselling and growth monitoring and distribution of take-home rations in ICDS and 
ensuring that they reach all the households with a child below two years is critical. 
Improving the composition and quality of the food supplements and increasing the reach 
of the take-home rations is essential. The achievement of optimal infant and young child 
feeding practices, particularly in ensuring appropriate complementary feeding practices, 
100
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Key Takeaways from POSHAN Abhiyaanremains a challenge. Therefore, it is imperative to use all existing programme platforms to 
emphasize complementary feeding at every possibly contact with families with children 
under two years of age.
The need of the hour is to sustain the POSHAN Abhiyaan for which actions looking 
forward must now fully consider gaps in service delivery, convergence between ICDS 
and health services to deliver the package of essential interventions, and continue to 
strengthen the focus on key nutrition behaviour such as complementary feeding.
LESSON 2: POSHAN ABHIYAAN HAS ENABLED A NATION-WIDE JAN 
ANDOLAN CATALYSING NUTRITION RELATED BEHAVIOUR CHANGE 
AT SCALE FOR POSITIVE IMPACT ON FEEDING AND HEALTH CARE 
PRACTICES
Jan Andolan, has been an integral part of POSHAN Abhiyaan. It was conceptualized to 
engage the community and support behaviour change for nutrition through a people’s 
movement with the ownership of the efforts being vested in the community rather than 
only in government delivery mechanisms.
POSHAN Maahs and Pakhwadas were celebrated with great enthusiasm involving all 
stakeholders, such as civil society organizations, academic institutions, PRIs and self-
help group (SHG) members. These celebrations of POSHAN Maah and Pakhwadas have 
demonstrated the power of cross-sectoral outreach for behaviour change communication. 
A focused and coherent SBCC Action Plan with standard messages is essential to take 
the work of POSHAN Abhiyaan forward. While the Jan Andolan activities are being 
organized with great zeal, it is imperative that such fervour continues throughout the 
year and beyond the designated months to facilitate behaviour change.
Despite successful implementation of the campaigns, the key platforms to reach households 
and children in the first 1,000 days should continue to be home visits, supplemented by 
community-based events and mass media. Jan Andolan could effectively be utilized to 
change community level awareness of normative behaviours through concerted messages. 
The messaging has to be complemented with strengthened delivery systems to implement 
interventions so that the demand for services from the sensitized communities could be 
met.
In extending the Jan Andolan, engagement with elected representatives at all levels–
from the Parliament to the Panchayats along with local partners–could be a next step to 
ensure continuity of enabling environment for behaviour change communication as well 
as synchronized and unified messaging.
Adopting healthy and nutrition behaviours requires more than knowledge; therefore, 
looking forward, it is critical to invest in understanding household constraints to behaviour 
change, their access to knowledge and other resources to support behaviour change, and 
to ensure that the Jan Andolan and other behaviour change efforts of POSHAN Abhiyaan 
are coupled with additional strategies that remove more barriers.
Key Takeaways from POSHAN Abhiyaan
101
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Building on this momentum, Jan Andolan should be intensified using high reach 
platforms such as home visits, community-based events, mass media and more with 
even greater participation of families and communities.
LESSON 3: POSHAN ABHIYAAN DEMONSTRATED THAT 
THE PROCESSES FOR INTER-SECTORAL CONVERGENCE 
ARE EFFECTIVELY OPERATIONALIZED THROUGH IN PLACE 
INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISMS AT MULTIPLE LEVELS
Malnutrition is multi-factorial in nature, and the outcomes of malnutrition are affected 
by actions in different sectors. It is well recognized that a multi-sectoral approach is 
therefore essential. Several sectoral policies and programmes exist in India that need to 
be effectively implemented to ensure reach to the intended beneficiaries. Recognizing 
the multi-sectoral nature of the malnutrition challenge, convergence was identified as 
one of the enabling activities for ensuring effective delivery of all sectoral interventions 
to households in the first 1,000 days.
POSHAN Abhiyaan conceptualized convergence at two levels:
1. Governance level, which creates institutional mechanisms to ensure coherent 
engagement with multiple departments; and
2. Impact level where “effective convergence” implies successful reach of programmes 
from relevant sectors that address the key determinants of under-nutrition for the 
same household, same woman and same child in the first 1,000 days (from pre-
conception until the child’s second birthday).
The governance level of convergence has been put in place quite firmly with POSHAN 
Abhiyaan. At this level, after the development of convergence action plans (CAP), States, 
Districts and Blocks are expected to conduct quarterly review meetings to examine 
progress and identify actions to meet the targets specified in the action plans. However, 
it has been found that discussions during such meetings are generic. In addition, CAP 
committees at lower levels are less empowered to take financial and operational decisions 
to close implementation gaps. It is challenging to monitor the multiple data reporting 
structures across different departments, using multiple data platforms, for the same set 
of beneficiary households, mothers and children. Therefore, it is important to examine 
the reporting structures and data platforms to optimize and reduce the burden and 
improve functionality for decision making. At the frontline, to ensure coordination and 
convergence between the Anganwadi workers, ASHA, and ANMs in delivering the services 
through clear and coordinated directives from the state and district levels.
Although the overarching intent of convergence is clear, the operational guidance does 
not make it explicit how stakeholders could ensure that multiple programmes reach the 
same mother–child dyad in the first 1,000-day period. The success of POSHAN Abhiyaan’s 
convergent action planning efforts will lie in the ability of the convergence-related 
processes to trigger the within- and across-sector actions that lead to effective reach 
of an agreed upon core set of interventions to all households in the 1,000-day period. 
102
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Key Takeaways from POSHAN AbhiyaanConvergence can only be successful when all interventions reach all target households 
in the right timeframes. Therefore, it is important to identify a core set of indicators of 
successful convergence that can be monitored and supported through CAP so that the 
review meetings become meaningful and enable progress tracking and programmatic 
support to ensure that the intent of convergence is fully met.
Institutional mechanisms that worked for intersectoral coordination must be strengthened 
and extended to build coalition on ground with other departments such as agriculture, 
school education, and more.
LESSON 4: POSHAN ABHIYAAN SHOWED THAT TECHNOLOGY CAN 
BE LEVERAGED FOR REAL TIME MONITORING OF LARGE SCALE 
HEALTH AND NUTRITION PROGRAMMES
Integrated Child Development Services-Common Application Software (ICDS-CAS) was 
introduced in POSHAN Abhiyaan, to facilitate real time monitoring for improving service 
delivery and programme management through an innovative web and mobile-phone 
based application. Although there were delays in the initial roll-out ICDS-CAS with low 
fund utilization, by September 2020, ICDS-CAS had been rolled out in 29 States with 359 
districts of the country. Additionally, 48% Anganwadi Workers had received smartphones 
and 56% Lady Supervisors had received smartphones as of September 2020. Thus, the 
technological intervention was not fully implemented across the country to completely 
assess its effects. Additionally, many States would need to accelerate access to mobile 
phones and training of providers and managers. The gaps in network issues, capacity 
building and supportive systems such as help desks need attention.
In addition to the procurement issues, ICDS-CAS also faced numerous other challenges. 
Firstly, roll-out of ICDS-CAS remained slow due to network issues in many districts. 
Secondly, majority of the AWWs using mobile/tablets continued to maintain records 
manually as well, which led to duplication of work. Also, there is very little evidence to 
suggest effective use of data collected on CAS for programme monitoring and course 
correction. The challenges pertaining to ICDS-CAS limited its effectiveness. Therefore, 
ICDS-CAS has now been replaced by POSHAN Tracker – a robust ICT enabled platform, to 
improve governance with regard to real-time monitoring of provisioning of supplementary 
nutrition for prompt supervisions and management of services has been rolled out 
successfully across all States/UTs covering all districts. Key points to consider to ensure 
the success of POSHAN Tracker are to address upfront the network, cloud storage and 
other technological challenges identified in rolling out ICDS-CAS. In addition, duplication 
of record keeping (paper and phone) must be limited to save time and enhance the 
effectiveness of AWWs. To support convergence, creating linkages and other approaches 
to enable data sharing by both the health and ICDS systems is essential, as they share 
the same beneficiaries. This could further help in avoiding duplication of efforts, and 
improve monitoring. Finally, sharpening data use within the ICDS and across the ICDS 
and other systems in the context of POSHAN Abhiyaan is critical to enable data-driven 
actions. Regardless of the source of the data, data use is a critical step in improving the 
impact of technology-enabled data gathering.
Key Takeaways from POSHAN Abhiyaan
103
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Sustained, comprehensive and multidimensional use of technology platforms for 
educating, counselling, on-site decision making, and work and task planning are all 
essential to realize the full impact of technology. Additionally, leveraging the use of 
data in showing clips and movies during home visits to the beneficiaries to further bring 
about behaviour change is another area for expanding POSHAN Abhiyaan.
LESSON 5: POSHAN ABHIYAAN SUPPORTED THE RESILIENCE OF 
HEALTH AND NUTRITION SYSTEMS DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC
The nation-wide lockdown imposed to curb the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic in 
March-April 2020 resulted in disruption in service delivery of many key health and nutrition 
services included under the POSHAN Abhiyaan umbrella framework of intervention during 
the second quarter of 2020. However, analysis of administrative data has demonstrated 
that services restored to near pre-pandemic levels by December 2020, demonstrating the 
resilience of health and nutrition systems of the country. It is likely that this restoration 
was due to the high salience of nutrition on the policy agenda in the pre-COVID era.
To continue the delivery of essential health and nutrition services to women and 
children along with following protocol, several policy adaptations and interventions 
were undertaken by MWCD and MoHFW. Although platforms like Anganwadi Centres 
were not operational during the peak of pandemic, several services were delivered to 
the beneficiaries at their doorstep during home visits. One such example is the ICDS 
supplementary nutrition programme (take-home rations), which was almost equal to the 
pre-pandemic levels even during the lockdown period of April-June 2020, because the 
services were delivered to the homes of the beneficiaries. Many States and UTs also added 
additional rations to provide extra care to the beneficiaries amid COVID-19 pandemic.
VHSNDs were also conducted in a staggered approach and in non-containment zones 
to expand access to ICDS services for beneficiaries and reduce the spread of COVID-19. 
Similarly, as many health facilities were trying to address the ongoing pandemic, the 
maternal and child health services were available on-demand, walk-in, or during home-
visits. Operational guidelines were also issued to the hospitals for conducting essential 
procedure for pre and post pregnancy.
Such measures and adaptations that were taken at the State- and Central-levels indicate 
that the Abhiyaan supported the continuation of service delivery despite the pandemic, 
and the commendable efforts undertaken by FLWs to provide essential services during 
the lock-down and immediately after, contributing to service restoration.
Despite these efforts, in the context of the continuing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, 
millions of babies born in 2020 have likely missed several essential interventions in 
health and nutrition. Since data are not available from ground-up surveys, there remains 
uncertainty about the impact on client populations for the programmes. However, the 
broad system-wide commitment to nutrition in the range of efforts to restore health and 
nutrition services was apparent across Ministries, across States and across development 
partners. Continued attention to ensure rapid and full restoration of services as well as 
new adaptations to services in the continuing pandemic is critical to the core POSHAN 
104
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Key Takeaways from POSHAN AbhiyaanAbhiyaan goal of delivering essential evidence-based interventions to all women and all 
children.
In addition, the pandemic has induced economic and food distress that must be tackled 
to accelerate progress on nutrition. Improving nutrition is difficult, if not impossible, when 
families are in economic distress. Nutrition-sensitive social protection could therefore play 
a key role in putting families back on the path to being able to provide better nutrition 
for their children. Therefore, all available social safety net and health/nutrition services 
– whether special services in the context of the pandemic or routine services – should 
be reaching families in the first 1000 days in a timely and targeted manner. This will also 
help to achieve convergence goals for the mission.
Innovative approaches to ensure service delivery of the essential health and nutrition 
services is needed to further improve quality, strengthening the system, and re-
energizing the existing programme to tackle the pandemic.
REFLECTION ON POSHAN ABHIYAAN BASED ON EARLY RESULTS 
AVAILABLE FOR 22 STATES FROM NFHS-5
The early results from POSHAN Abhiyaan has highlighted that there has been an 
improvement in some of the immediate and underlying determinants, and the coverage 
of the intervention. The comparison of the NFHS-4 (2015-16) to NFHS-5 (2019-20) for 
22 states for which factsheets are available, have painted a mixed picture. Many States 
have witnessed an improvement in the immediate determinants like infant and child 
feeding practices, along with consistent improvement in the underlying determinants like 
water and sanitation, and women’s education and early marriage. There has also been an 
improvement in the coverage of interventions like IFA, institutional births, immunisation, 
Vitamin A, and diarrhoea cases treated with ORS and zinc. Due to the multi-factorial 
nature of malnutrition, the improvement in determinants and coverage highlights that the 
Mission has been able to facilitate positive results. Despite these improvements, it should 
be noted that the outcome indicators have slowed down and in fact worsened in some 
States. This calls for conducting deeper analysis of NFHS-5 to provide better insights on 
the plausible factors that could have resulted in slowing down and understanding the 
role of immediate and underlying determinants.
In conclusion, the POSHAN Abhiyaan has been a success in terms of creating a momentum 
among the beneficiaries through Jan Andolan, bring focus towards the importance of first 
1,000 days along with providing a package of interventions for the same, demonstrating 
convergence between different line ministries, leveraging the use of technology for real-
time monitoring of nutrition and health, and highlighting resilience amid pandemic.
Key Takeaways from POSHAN Abhiyaan
105
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
References
1. Development Initiatives, 2018. 2018 Global Nutrition Report: Shining a light to spur 
action on nutrition. Bristol, UK: Development Initiatives
2. Menon, P., R. Avula, E. Sarswat, S. Mani, M. Jangid, A. Singh, S. Kaur, A.K. Dubey, 
S. Gupta, D. Nair, P. Agarwal, and N. Agrawal. 2020. Tracking India’s progress on 
addressing malnutrition: What will it take? POSHAN Policy Note 34. New Delhi: 
International Food Policy Research Institute.
3. Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DEMO), NITI Aayog. 2020. “Evaluation 
of Centrally Sponsored Schemes in Women and Child Development Sector”
4. Women and Child Development Dashboard, MoWCD, https:/ /wcd.dashboard.nic.in/ 
(accessed on 27th May 2021)
5. Rajpal, S., W. Joe, R. Kim, A. Kumar, and S. V. Subramanian. 2020. “Child Undernutrition 
and Convergence of Multisectoral Interventions in India: An Econometric Analysis of 
National Family Health Survey 2015–16.” Frontiers in Public Health  8 (April): 1–10. 
https:/ /doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2020.00129 .
6. UNICEF. 6 May 2020. “Millions of pregnant mothers and babies born during COVID-19 
pandemic threatened by strained health systems and disruptions in services- UNICEF”. 
https:/ /www.unicef.org/rosa/press-releases/millions-pregnant-mothers-and-babies-
born-during-covid-19-pandemic-threatened
7. Roberton, T., Carter E., Chou, V., Stegmuller, A., Jackson, B., Tam, Y., Sawadogo-Lewis, 
T., and Walker, N. 2020. “Early estimates of the indirect effects of the COVID-19 
pandemic on maternal and child mortality in low-income and middle-income 
countries: a modelling study”. The Lancet, Global Health, Vol. 8, Issue 7, E901-E908.
8. https:/ /doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(20)30229-1
9. Chakrabarti, S., P. Singh, and T. Bruckner. 2020. “Association of Poor Sanitation With 
Growth Measurements Among Children in India.” JAMA Network Open  3 (4). https:/ /
doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.2791 .
107
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
10. Dhami, M.V., F.A. Ogbo, U.L. Osuagwu, and K.E. Agho. 2019. “Prevalence and Factors 
Associated with Complementary Feeding Practices among Children Aged 6-23 
Months in India: A Regional Analysis.” BMC Public Health  19 (1): 1034. https:/ /doi.
org/10.1186/s12889-019-7360-6 .
11. Kim, R., S. Rajpal, W. Joe, D.J. Corsi, R. Sankar, A. Kumar, and S. V. Subramanian. 2019. 
“Assessing Associational Strength of 23 Correlates of Child Anthropometric Failure: 
An Econometric Analysis of the 2015-2016 National Family Health Survey, India.” 
Social Science and Medicine  238 (January 2019): 112374. https:/ /doi.org/10.1016/j.
socscimed.2019.112374 .
12. Lee, H.Y., J. Oh, R. Kim, and S. V. Subramanian. 2020. “Long-Term Trend in 
Socioeconomic Inequalities and Geographic Variation in the Utilization of Antenatal 
Care Service in India between 1998 and 2015.” Health Services Research  55 (3): 
419–31. https:/ /doi.org/10.1111/1475-6773.13277 .
13. Menon, P., R. Avula, S. Pandey, S. Scott, and A. Kumar. 2019. “Rethinking Effective 
Nutrition Convergence: An Analysis of Intervention Co-Coverage Data.” Economic & 
Political Weekly , no. 24: 18–21.
14. Reese, H., P. Routray, B. Torondel, S.S. Sinharoy, S. Mishra, M.C. Freeman, H.H. Chang, 
and T. Clasen. 2019. “Assessing Longer-Term Effectiveness of a Combined Household-
Level Piped Water and Sanitation Intervention on Child Diarrhoea, Acute Respiratory 
Infection, Soil-Transmitted Helminth Infection and Nutritional Status: A Matched 
Cohort Study in Rural Odisha, .” International Journal of Epidemiology  48 (6): 1757–67. 
https:/ /doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyz157 .
15. SK, S., P. Menon, and Aditi. 2020. “Tracking Progress in Anthropometric Failure among 
Children in India : A Geospatial Analysis Epidemiology.” Epidemiology  10 (October).
16. Swaminathan, A., R. Kim, Y. Xu, J.C. Blossom, W. Joe, R. Venkataramanan, A. Kumar, 
and S. V. Subramanian. 2019. “Burden of Child Malnutrition in India: A View from 
Parliamentary Constituencies.” Economic and Political Weekly  54 (2): 44–52.
17. Young, M.F., P. Nguyen, S. Kachwaha, L. Tran Mai, S. Ghosh, R. Agrawal, J. Escobar-
Alegria, P. Menon, and R. Avula. 2020. “It Takes a Village: An Empirical Analysis of 
How Husbands, Mothers-in-Law, Health Workers, and Mothers Influence Breastfeeding 
Practices in Uttar Pradesh, India.” Maternal and Child Nutrition  16 (2): 1–14. https:/ /
doi.org/10.1111/mcn.12892 .
18. World Health Organization. Pulse survey on continuity of essential health services 
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Interim Report. August 2020.
108
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
ReferencesAnnexures
ANNEXURE 1A: STATE TEMPLATE-WOMEN AND CHILD 
DEVELOPMENT
Fourth POSHAN Abhiyaan Monitoring Report: Data Collection Form
WCD TEMPLATE
[Kindly fill information and share latest by 25th Sept 2020]
1. Name of the State/UT:  ………………………………………………………………...
2. Total number of Districts in the State:  ………………………………………………………………...
3. Total number of Districts with ICDS-CAS:  ………………………………………………………………...
4. Total number of Blocks in the State:  ………………………………………………………………...
5. Total number of Blocks with ICDS-CAS:  ………………………………………………………………...
6. Total number of Villages in the State:  ………………………………………………………………...
7. Total number of AWC in the State/UT:  ………………………………………………………………...
8. If UT, does the UT have a State Legislature? Yes || No
HUMAN RESOURCE
HUMAN RESOURCE- POSHAN Abhiyaan (as on 31st March 2020 )
A Joint Project CoordinatorNo. of posts sanctioned
No. of posts filled
B ConsultantNo. of posts sanctioned
No. of posts filled
C Project AssociateNo. of posts sanctioned
No. of posts filled
109
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
SECTION I:
NOTE : You are requested to share our response separately for two months
March 2020 July 2020
A. TRAINING & CAPACITY BUILDING
1.1No. of District level Resource Groups 
(DRGs ) for ILA training been established
1.2No. of Block level Resource Groups ( BRGs ) 
for ILA training been established
1.3 Total no. of AWWs enrolled  for e-ILA
1.4No. of enrolled AWWs who have completed 
e-ILA  training
1.5Total no. of Lady Supervisors enrolled  for 
e-ILA
1.6No. of enrolled Lady Supervisors who have 
completed e-ILA training
1.7Staff trained on ICDS-CAS Dashboard/Mobile
Staff March 2020 July 2020
ADPOs
BCDPOs
CLSs
DAWW
1.8 No. of AWWs who have started entry in ICDS-CAS till July 2020: 
March 2020 July 2020
1.9Staff trained on 
ILA
Nos. TrainedNo. of modules 
Nos. 
TrainedNo. of modules 
Less 
than 77-15More 
than 15Less 
than 77-15More 
than 15
AState Level (SRG 
members)
BDistrict Level 
(DRG members)
CBlock Level 
(BRG members)
DSector Level 
(AWWs)
B. Convergence
1.10
AHas State/UT 
submitted the 
Convergence 
Action Plan 
(CAP) to CPMU 
for FY 2020-
21 (If no, give 
reason )Yes || 
No || 
110
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresBNo. of Districts 
in which CAP 
has been formedNo. of 
Districts:
CNo. of 
Districts held 
Convergence 
Committee 
meeting for the 
1st Quarter of FY 
2020-21No. of 
Districts:
DNo. of Districts 
developed 
&submitted CAP 
for FY 2020-21No. of 
Districts:
SECTION II:
NOTE : You are requested to share our response separately for two months
March 2020 July 2020
A. PROGRAMME ACTIVITES- ICDS
2.1Total number of pregnant women enrolled 
for Anganwadi services
2.2No. of pregnant women  who received THR 
for:
15-21 days
> 21+ days
2.3Total number of lactating women enrolled 
for Anganwadi services
2.4No. of lactating women  who received THR 
for:
15-21 days
> 21+ days
2.5Total number of children 6-36 months old 
enrolled for Anganwadi services
2.6No. of children 6-36 months  old who 
received THR for:
15-21 days
> 21+ days
2.7Total number of children 3 yr-6 yr old 
enrolled for Anganwadi services
2.8No. of children 3 yr-6 yr old  who received 
hot-cooked meal for:
15-21 days
> 21+ days
Annexures
111
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
2.9Total number of children 0-5 years old 
enrolled for Anganwadi services
2.10No. of children 0-5 years  old who were 
weighed 
2.11No. of children 0-5 years  old whose height 
was taken (measured)
B. Output Indicators- ICDS
2.12% of newborns  with low birth weight  
(< 2500 gms)
2.13% of children 0-5 years  who were 
moderately stunted  (height-for-age)
2.14% of children 0-5 years  who were severely 
stunted  (height-for-age)
2.15% of children 0-5 years  who were 
moderately underweight (weight-for-age)
2.16% of children 0-5 years  who were severely 
underweight  (weight-for-age)
2.17% of children 0-5 years  with moderately 
acute malnutrition  (weight-for-height)
2.18% of children 0-5 years with severely 
acute malnutrition  (weight-for-height)
2.19% of children who were initiated 
breastfeeding  within one hour of birth.
2.20% Infants 0-6 months of age who are fed 
exclusively with breast milk .
2.21% Children from 6–24 months who were 
initiated timely  complementary feeding 
along with continued breastfeeding
2.22% Children from 6–24 months  consuming 
adequate diet
C. HOME VISITS by AWW
2.27Out of the mandated number of home 
visits, the % of home visits made by AWWs
2.28% of home visits to household with 
pregnant mothers to counsel on 
appropriate practices during pregnancy
2.29
A.PMMVY scheme
No. of pregnant women targeted
B.No. of pregnant women benefited as per 
the entitlement
2.30% of home visits to household with young 
infant (less than 6 month)  to counsel on 
Importance of immediate breastfeeding, 
initiation of complementary feeding and 
continued breastfeeding
112
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresD. During COVID-19 times
2.31Please specify, any innovative techniques 
applied for providing services (March – 
July 2020) during COVID-19 19 timesProvide the innovations in brief
(if required, place the annexure for 
details )
A Counselling
B Growth Monitoring
C Community Based Events (CBEs)
D Pre-school Education
E Additional food provided other than THR
2.32In how many Districts, AWW is involved 
in contact tracing of the migrant workers 
who came back from other cities?
2.33During COVID-19 times, mention on what 
all other activities AWW is involved in?1.
2.
3.
SECTION III: INNOVATION & FLEXI-PLAN
Sn Status of Flexi-Plan
3.1 a. Constitution 
of State Level 
Sanctioning 
Committee 
(SLSC)
(Y/N)
(if no, reason 
and timeline)b. Date of 
Meeting of 
SLSC held
(if no, 
reason 
and 
timeline)c. Status of 
implementation
 (Detailed 
Activities)d. Funds 
earmarked
(In lakh Rs.)e. Funds 
utilised
(In lakh 
Rs.)f. Balance 
Funds 
to be 
utilized
(timeline 
also to be 
given)
SN STATUS OF INNOVATION
3.2 a. 
Innovation 
plan 
prepared 
(Y/N)
(if no, 
reason and 
timeline)b. Date of 
Meeting of 
SLSC held
(if no, 
reason and 
timeline)c. Approval 
of 
Committee 
obtained
(if no, 
reason and 
timeline)d. Status 
of imple -
mentation 
and details 
of major 
activitiese. Funds 
earmarked
(In lakh 
Rs.)f. Funds 
utilised
(In lakh 
Rs.)g. Balance 
Funds to 
be utilized
(timeline 
also to be 
given)
Annexures
113
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
SECTION IV: ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Sn Information Required
4.1 Specify the main challenges faced in implementation of POSHAN Abhiyaan at State/
UT level during COVID-19 Times:
(Provide details as attachment)
i.    ICDS_CAS
ii. ILA & e-ILA
iii. HR
iv. Growth Monitoring Devices
v. Convergence
vi. Jan Andolan/ Community Mobilization
vii. Any other
4.2 Specify the good practices or innovations State/UT has done in the year 2020 to 
improve the nutrition indicators during the first 1000 days life cycle especially in 
COVID-19 times:
(Provide details as attachment)
114
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresANNEXURE 1B: STATE TEMPLATE-HEALTH
FOURTH POSHAN Abhiyaan Monitoring Report: Data Collection 
Form
Health Template
[Kindly fill information and share latest by 25 Sept 2020]
1. Name of the State/UT: …………………………………………..
2. Total number of Districts in the State:  …………………………………………..
3. Total number of Blocks in the State:  …………………………………………..
4. Total number of Villages in the State:  …………………………………………..
5. If UT, does the UT have a State Legislature?   Yes || No
SECTION I:
Sn Information Required Response
A. INFRASTRUCTURE
1.1 Number of Health Facilities in the State/UT- (as on 31st March 2020)
CHCs No. sanctioned
No. functional
No. functional as FRU
PHCs No. sanctioned
No. functional
Additional PHCs No. sanctioned
No. functional
Sub Centres No. sanctioned
No. functional
Health and Wellness Centres 
(HWC)No. sanctioned
No. functional
1.2 Provide details for HWCs (as on 31st March 2020)
Total no. HWCs planned
No. of HWCs operational
No. of HWCs providing ALL 
the proposed services
B. HUMAN RESOURCES (as on 31st March 2020)
1.3 a. Lady Health Visitor (LHV) No. of posts sanctioned
No. of LHVs in position
b. ANM No. of posts sanctioned
Annexures
115
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
No. of ANMs in position
c. ASHA Facilitators Total no. in State/UT
No. of ASHAs per facilitator
d. ASHA Total no. of ASHAs working 
in State/UTs
SECTION II:
NOTE : You are requested to share your response separately for two months
March 2020 July 2020
A. PROGRAMME AND OUTPUT ACTIVITES- NHM
2.1    A Total no. of pregnant women
BTotal no. of lactating women
CTotal no. of children 6-59 months
DTotal no. c hildren 12-23 months
ETotal number of children 5-9 years
FTotal no. of adolescent girls 10-19 years
GTotal number of out of school adolescent girls 
10-19 years
2.2Total no. of pregnant women who registered 
for ANC in the first trimester (i.e. in the first 12 
weeks of pregnancy)
2.3Total no. of pregnant women who received 4 or 
more ANC check-ups
2.4 Total no. of pregnant women given TT2/booster
2.5Total no. of pregnant women given one 
albendazole tablet after first trimester
2.6Total number of pregnant women  given 180 IFA 
tablets during ANC
2.7 Total no. of institutional deliveries
2.8Total number of lactating women  given 180 IFA 
tablets 
2.9Total n o. of children 12-23 months completely 
immunized
2.10Total n o. of children 6-59 months  who were 
provided at least 8-10 doses of IFA syrup  per 
month against the target population
2.11Total number of children 5-9 years (girls and 
boys) given weekly IFA  supplementation per 
month against the target population
116
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Annexures2.12Total number of children 10-19 years (girls and 
boys) given weekly IFA  supplementation per 
month against the target population
2.13Total no. of children (9-23 months)  who have 
received 1st dose of Vitamin-A supplementation
2.14Total no. of diarrhoea episodes reported in 
children 0 to 59 months of age 
2.15Total no. of deaths reported  due to childhood 
(0-59 months) diarrhoea 
2.16Total no. of childhood diarrhoea  cases treated in 
the facility (inpatient)
2.17Total n o. of diarrhoea episodes  reported in 
children 0 to 59 months of age where only ORS 
was given
2.18Total number of childhood (0-59 months) 
diarrhoea  cases reported treated with ORS and 
zinc
2.19Total no. Number of newborn breastfed 
within one hour of birth (Early initiation of 
breastfeeding)
2.20No. of children 6 to 59 months  suffering from 
ANY anaemia
2.21No. of adolescent girls 15-19 years  suffering from 
ANY anaemia
2.22No. of pregnant women  suffering from ANY 
anaemia
2.23 AMB programme update
AHas IFA been included in the EDL? Completed/In process/ Remark
BHas the State procured digital invasive 
hemoglobinometersCompleted/In process/ Remark
B. HOME VISITS by ASHAs (DURING COVID-19 TIMES) MARCH -JULY 2020
2.24Out of the mandated number of home visits, the 
% of home visits made by ASHA during March-
July 2020
2.25% of home visits to household with pregnant 
mothers to counsel on appropriate practices 
during pregnancy during March-July 2020
2.26 % of HBNC home visits in March-July 2020
2.27Please specify, any innovative techniques applied 
for providing services likeProvide the innovations in brief 
(if required, place the annexure 
for details)
ACounselling
BImmunization
Annexures
117
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
CIFA (syrup, pink, red, blue) distribution
DORS and zinc distribution 
ETotal sick SAM admission at NRC
FTotal sick SAM children discharged with target 
with gain at NRC
2.28In how many Districts, ASHAs is involved in 
contact tracing of the migrant workers who 
came back from other cities?
2.29 During COVID-19 times, mention on what all 
other activities ASHAs are involved in?1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
SECTION III:
SN INFORMATION REQUIRED RESPONSE
3.1 Specify the main challenges faced in 
implementation of POSHAN Abhiyaan at State/
UT level during COVID-19 Times:
(Provide details as attachment)
118
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresANNEXURE 2: RUBRIC
Theme Sub- ThemeIndicators (as per Template) 
-USING ONLY MAR 2020 DATAWeights 
(TOTAL=100)
WCD template TOTAL-50 50
Governance & Institutional Mechanism 12
1.1 Fund Allocation 3
% utilized by the State/ UT (as on 
July, 2020) 0 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
1.2 Constitution of Committees and Resource Groups 9
  % of districts where DRGs have 
been formed– Section 1–A- 1.1 A1.20 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
  % of blocks where BRGs have 
been formed Section 1–A–1.20 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
  % of districts where the CAP 
committees have been formed–
Section 1–B–1.10 B0 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
Strategy and Planning 3
  Has the State/UT level CAP been 
submitted to CPMU for the year 
2020-21- Section 1 B–1.10A1 if YES; 0 if NO
% of districts that developed and 
submitted CAP for the year 2020-
21- Section 1 B–1.10D0.5 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
1.5 if 50%-<75%
2 if ≥ 75%
Inputs for Service Delivery & Capacities 23
3.1 HR 6
  
% of joint project coordinator 
positions filled– HR–QA 0.5 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
1.5 if 50%-<75%
2 if ≥ 75%
Annexures
119
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Theme Sub- ThemeIndicators (as per Template) 
-USING ONLY MAR 2020 DATAWeights 
(TOTAL=100)
% of consultant positions filled 
-HR–QB 0.5 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
1.5 if 50%-<75%
2 if ≥ 75%
% of project associate positions 
filled - HR–QC0.5 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
1.5 if 50%-<75%
2 if ≥ 75%
Supplies 5
 Mobile phones % of mobile phones distributed to 
districts0.25 if <25%
0.5 if 25%-<50% 
0.75 if 50%-<75%
1 if ≥ 75%
Growth monitoring 
devices % of weighing scales-infant 
distributed0.25 if <25%
0.5 if 25%-<50%
0.75 if 50%-<75%
1 if ≥ 75%
% of weighing scales-adult 
distributed 0.25 if <25%
0.5 if 25%-<50%
0.75 if 50%-<75%
1 if ≥ 75%
% of infantometers distributed 0.25 if <25%
0.5 if 25%-<50%
0.75 if 50%-<75%
1 if ≥ 75%
% of stadiometers distributed 0.25 if <25%
0.5 if 25%-<50%
0.75 if 50%-<75%
1 if ≥ 75%
Training and capacity building 12
% of LS who completed training on 
e-ILA modules - Section 1. A. -1.6 . 0 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
120
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresTheme Sub- ThemeIndicators (as per Template) 
-USING ONLY MAR 2020 DATAWeights 
(TOTAL=100)
% of AWWs who completed 
training on e-ILA modules Section 
1. A. -1.40 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 % of CDPOs who were trained on 
dashboard/mobile - Section IA. 
1.7B. 0 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
% of LS who were trained on 
dashboard/mobile - Section IA. 
1.7C. 0 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
Programme activities and intervention coverage 12
4.1 Programme activities- ICDS 12
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 % of pregnant women who 
received THR for 21+ days- 
Section II. 2.2. 0 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
% of lactating women who 
received THR for 21 + days- 
Section II. 2.4. 0 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
% of children 6-36 months who 
received THR for 21+ days - 
Section II. 2.5.0 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
% of children 0-5 years who were 
weighed- Section 2 A. 2.10 0 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
 3 if ≥ 75%
HEALTH TEMPLATE TOTAL-50 50
Service delivery essentials 12
1.1 Infrastructure  9
Annexures
121
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Theme Sub- ThemeIndicators (as per Template) 
-USING ONLY MAR 2020 DATAWeights 
(TOTAL=100)
  % of sub centres functional.  
Section 1 A. 1.1B0 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
 % of CHCs functional Section 1 A. 
1.1A0 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
 % of HWC functional Section 1 A. 
1.1E0 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
1.2 Human Resource  3
  % of ANM posts filled– Section I-B 
1.3b0 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
Programme activities and intervention coverage 38
2.1 Programme activities 36
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 % of newborn breastfed within 
one hour of birth– Section 2 A–2.19 
[ Data for live births from NITI]0 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
% of children (12-23 mo) fully 
immunized in– Section 2 A–2.9. 0 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
% of children (6-59 mo) who were 
provided at least 8-10 doses of 
IFA syrup per month– Section 2 
A–2.10.0 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
% of pregnant women who 
registered for ANC in the first 
trimester– Section 2 A–2.2.0 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
122
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresTheme Sub- ThemeIndicators (as per Template) 
-USING ONLY MAR 2020 DATAWeights 
(TOTAL=100)
% of pregnant women who 
received 4 or more ANCs– Section 
2 A–2.3.0 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
% of pregnant women who were 
given 180 IFA tablets Mar 2020- 
Section 2 A–2.60 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
% of lactating women who were 
given 180 IFA tablets– Section 2 
A–2.80 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
% of 5-9 years children who were 
given weekly IFA tablets– Section 
2 A–2.110 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
% of pregnant women given TT2/
booster in Mar 2020/ Section 2 A 
-2.40 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
% of pregnant women given one 
Albendazole tablet after first 
trimester - Section 2 A–2.50 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
% of children (0–59 months) 
diarrhoea cases reported treated 
with ORS and Zinc– Section 2 
A-2.180 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
% of home visits to household 
with pregnant mothers to counsel 
on appropriate practices during 
pregnancy during March-July 
2020; Section 2 B-2.250 if <25%
1 if 25%-<50%
2 if 50%-<75%
3 if ≥ 75%
2.2 AMB strategy 2
Annexures
123
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Theme Sub- ThemeIndicators (as per Template) 
-USING ONLY MAR 2020 DATAWeights 
(TOTAL=100)
 Has IFA been included in the EDL? 
Section 2 A -2.23A0 Yet to begin
0.5 In process
1 Completed
Has the State procured digital 
invasive hemoglobinometers 
Section 2 A -2.23B0 Yet to begin
0.5 In process
1 Completed
124
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresANNEXURE 3: STATE SCORE DASHBOARD OVERALL
   WCD 
Domain 
1:  
Gover -
nance & 
Institu -
tional 
Mecha -
nismWCD 
Domain 
2:  
Strategy  
and 
PlanningWCD  
Domain  
3: 
Service 
Delivery 
& Capac -
itiesWCD Do -
main 4: 
Program 
activi -
ties and 
inter-
vention 
coverageOverall 
WCD 
score_
Sum 
of all 4 
domainsHealth 
Domain  
1: 
Service 
delivery 
essen -
tialsHealth 
Domain  
2: 
Program 
activi -
ties and 
inter-
vention 
coverageOverall 
Health 
score: 
Sum of 2 
domainsTotal 
imple -
mentation 
score
  Max value 12 3 23 12 50 12 38 50 100
Large 
StatesAndhra 
Pradesh10.00 3.00 22.00 12.00 47.00 12.00 28.00 40.00 87.00
Assam 1.00 1.50 9.50 9.00 21.00 11.00 30.50 41.50 62.50
Bihar 10.00 3.00 19.00 6.00 38.00 6.00 16.50 22.50 60.50
Chattisgarh 10.00 2.50 9.25 12.00 33.75 11.00 27.50 38.50 72.25
Gujarat 10.00 3.00 23.00 12.00 48.00 12.00 25.50 37.50 85.50
Haryana 11.00 3.00 6.50 9.00 29.50 10.00 30.00 40.00 69.50
Himachal 
Pradesh11.00 3.00 17.25 11.00 42.25 9.00 31.50 40.50 82.75
Jharkhand 10.00 3.00 12.00 11.00 36.00 11.00 26.50 37.50 73.50
Karnataka 10.00 3.00 9.00 12.00 34.00 12.00 29.00 41.00 75.00
Kerala 11.00 1.50 14.75 9.00 36.25 12.00 16.00 28.00 64.25
Madhya 
Pradesh10.00 3.00 19.25 12.00 44.25 10.00 28.50 38.50 82.75
Maharashtra 11.00 2.00 20.50 12.00 45.50 10.00 32.00 42.00 87.50
Odisha 9.00 2.00 9.25 12.00 32.25 11.00 31.00 42.00 74.25
Punjab 9.00 2.00 5.75 11.00 27.75 9.00 11.00 20.00 47.75
Rajasthan 10.00 3.00 17.75 9.00 39.75 10.00 17.00 27.00 66.75
Tamil Nadu 11.00 3.00 22.50 12.00 48.50 10.00 24.50 34.50 83.00
Telangana 10.00 3.00 10.50 10.00 33.50 11.00 31.00 42.00 75.50
Uttar Pradesh 10.00 3.00 14.00 5.00 32.00 9.00 25.50 34.50 66.50
Uttarakhand 10.00 1.50 11.00 9.00 31.50 10.00 26.50 36.50 68.00
Small 
StatesArunachal 
Pradesh9.00 3.00 3.75 0.00 15.75 9.00 11.50 20.50 36.25
Goa 4.00 1.50 6.50 12.00 24.00 12.00 20.00 32.00 56.00
Manipur 2.00 0.00 1.25 0.00 3.25 10.00 14.00 24.00 27.25
Meghalaya 12.00 3.00 19.00 11.00 45.00 11.00 12.50 23.50 68.50
Mizoram 11.00 3.00 12.00 11.00 37.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 37.00
Nagaland 12.00 3.00 17.00 1.00 33.00 11.00 7.00 18.00 51.00
Sikkim 11.00 3.00 18.75 12.00 44.75 11.00 25.50 36.50 81.25
Tripura 9.00 3.00 14.50 12.00 38.50 10.00 13.50 23.50 62.00
UTsAndaman & 
Nicobar4.00 1.50 21.50 12.00 39.00 11.00 26.00 37.00 76.00
Chandigarh 10.00 3.00 23.00 12.00 48.00 9.00 23.00 32.00 80.00
D & N Haveli & 
Daman & Diu10.00 2.00 23.00 12.00 47.00 12.00 28.00 40.00 87.00
Delhi 8.00 1.00 14.50 12.00 35.50 9.00 15.50 24.50 60.00
Jammu & 
Kashmir10.00 2.00 14.00 7.00 33.00 11.00 23.50 34.50 67.50
Ladakh 3.00 3.00 5.00 9.00 20.00 10.00 20.00 30.00 50.00
Lakshadweep 11.00 3.00 11.50 12.00 37.50 11.00 15.00 26.00 63.50
Puducherry 7.00 2.50 6.50 8.00 24.00 10.00 20.50 30.50 54.50
Annexures
125
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Governance & Institutional Mechanism, WCD
   % utilized 
by the 
State/ UT 
(as on 
March, 
2020)1.1: Fund 
Allocation% of 
districts 
where 
DRGs 
have been 
formed% of 
blocks 
where 
BRGs 
have been 
formed% of districts 
where the 
convergence 
action plan 
committees 
have been 
formed1.2: Con -
stitution of 
Commit -
tees and 
Resource 
GroupsDomain 1: 
Gover -
nance & 
Institution -
al Mecha -
nism
  Max value 3 3 3 3 3 9 12
Large 
StatesAndhra Pradesh 1.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 10.00
Assam 1.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00
Bihar 1.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 10.00
Chattisgarh 1.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 10.00
Gujarat 1.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 10.00
Haryana 2.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 11.00
Himachal Pradesh 2.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 11.00
Jharkhand 1.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 10.00
Karnataka 1.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 10.00
Kerala 2.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 11.00
Madhya Pradesh 1.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 10.00
Maharashtra 2.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 11.00
Odisha 0.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 9.00
Punjab 0.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 9.00
Rajasthan 1.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 10.00
Tamil Nadu 2.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 11.00
Telangana 1.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 10.00
Uttar Pradesh 1.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 10.00
Uttarakhand 1.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 10.00
Small 
StatesArunachal Pradesh 0.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 9.00
Goa 1.00 1.00   3.00 0.00 3.00 4.00
Manipur 2.00 2.00       0.00 2.00
Meghalaya 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 12.00
Mizoram 2.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 11.00
Nagaland 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 12.00
Sikkim 2.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 11.00
Tripura 0.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 9.00
UTsAndaman & 
Nicobar1.00 1.00     3.00 3.00 4.00
Chandigarh 1.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 10.00
D & N Haveli & 
Daman & Diu1.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 10.00
Delhi 2.00 2.00 3.00 3.00   6.00 8.00
Jammu & Kashmir 1.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 10.00
Ladakh 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 3.00
Lakshadweep 2.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 11.00
Puducherry 0.00 0.00 2.00 3.00 2.00 7.00 7.00
Score: < 25% : 0 25%-50% : 1 50%-75% : 2 > 75% : 3
126
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresStrategy and Planning, WCD
   Convergence action plan 
submitted to CPMU for 
the year 2020-21% of districts that 
developed and 
submitted CAP for 
the year 2020-21Domain 2: Strategy 
and Planning
  Max value 1 2 3
Large StatesAndhra Pradesh 1.00 2.00 3.00
Assam 1.00 0.50 1.50
Bihar 1.00 2.00 3.00
Chattisgarh 1.00 1.50 2.50
Gujarat 1.00 2.00 3.00
Haryana 1.00 2.00 3.00
Himachal Pradesh 1.00 2.00 3.00
Jharkhand 1.00 2.00 3.00
Karnataka 1.00 2.00 3.00
Kerala 0.00 1.50 1.50
Madhya Pradesh 1.00 2.00 3.00
Maharashtra 0.00 2.00 2.00
Odisha 0.00 2.00 2.00
Punjab 0.00 2.00 2.00
Rajasthan 1.00 2.00 3.00
Tamil Nadu 1.00 2.00 3.00
Telangana 1.00 2.00 3.00
Uttar Pradesh 1.00 2.00 3.00
Uttarakhand 1.00 0.50 1.50
Small StatesArunachal Pradesh 1.00 2.00 3.00
Goa 1.00 0.50 1.50
Manipur     0.00
Meghalaya 1.00 2.00 3.00
Mizoram 1.00 2.00 3.00
Nagaland 1.00 2.00 3.00
Sikkim 1.00 2.00 3.00
Tripura 1.00 2.00 3.00
UTsAndaman & Nicobar 1.00 0.50 1.50
Chandigarh 1.00 2.00 3.00
D & N Haveli & Daman  
and Diu0.00 2.00 2.00
Delhi 1.00   1.00
Jammu & Kashmir 0.00 2.00 2.00
Ladakh 1.00 2.00 3.00
Lakshadweep 1.00 2.00 3.00
Puducherry 1.00 1.50 2.50
Score:    No : 0; Yes : 1 < 25% : 0 25%-50% : 1 50%-75% : 2 > 75% : 3
Annexures
127
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Inputs for Service Delivery & Capacities, WCD
   
% of joint project 
coordinator positions 
filled 
% of consultant 
positions filled
% of project associate 
positions filled
3.1: HR
% of mobile phones 
distributed to districts 
% of weighing scales-
infant distributed
% of weighing scales-
adult distributed
% of infantometers 
distributed
% of stadiometers 
distributed
3.2: Supplies
% of LS who 
completed training on 
e-ILA modules 
% of AWWs who 
completed training on 
e-ILA modules
% of CDPOs who were 
trained on dashboard/
mobile
% of LS who were 
trained on dashboard/
mobile
3.3:  Training and 
capacity building
Domain 3: Service 
Delivery & Capacities
  Max value 2 2 2 6 1 1 1 1 1 5 3 3 3 3 12 23
Large 
StatesAndhra 
Pradesh2.00 1.00 2.00 5.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00 22.00
Assam 1.50 2.00 1.00 4.50 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 9.50
Bihar 2.00 2.00 2.00 6.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 2.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 8.00 19.00
Chattisgarh 0.50 2.00 1.50 4.00 0.75 0.50 0.50 0.25 0.25 2.25 1.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 3.00 9.25
Gujarat 2.00 2.00 2.00 6.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00 23.00
Haryana 0.50 0.50 2.00 3.00 1.00 0.25 0.25 1.00 1.00 3.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 6.50
Himachal 
Pradesh2.00 2.00 2.00 6.00 0.25 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 4.25 1.00 1.00 2.00 3.00 7.00 17.25
Jharkhand 2.00 0.50 1.50 4.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 1.00 3.00 12.00
Karnataka 1.00 2.00 1.50 4.50 0.50 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 4.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 9.00
Kerala 2.00 1.50 2.00 5.50 0.25 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 4.25 0.00 0.00 3.00 2.00 5.00 14.75
Madhya 
Pradesh2.00 2.00 2.00 6.00 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.00 1.00 4.25 3.00 3.00   3.00 9.00 19.25
Maharashtra 2.00 1.00 1.50 4.50 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 3.00 3.00 2.00 3.00 11.00 20.50
Odisha 1.00 0.50 0.50 2.00 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 1.25 3.00 3.00     6.00 9.25
Punjab 0.50 0.50 0.50 1.50 0.25 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 4.25 0.00 0.00   0.00 0.00 5.75
Rajasthan 2.00 2.00 2.00 6.00 0.50 0.25 0.50 0.75 0.75 2.75 3.00 3.00 1.00 2.00 9.00 17.75
Tamil Nadu 2.00 2.00 1.50 5.50 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00 22.50
Telangana 2.00 2.00 2.00 6.00 0.50 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 4.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 10.50
Uttar Pradesh 1.00 0.50 0.50 2.00 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.25 0.25 2.00 3.00 3.00 1.00 3.00 10.00 14.00
Uttarakhand 2.00 2.00 2.00 6.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 11.00
128
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresSmall 
StatesArunachal 
Pradesh0.50 1.50 0.50 2.50 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 1.25 0.00 0.00     0.00 3.75
Goa 0.50 0.50 0.50 1.50 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 6.50
Manipur       0.00 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 1.25         0.00 1.25
Meghalaya 2.00 1.00 2.00 5.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 3.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 19.00
Mizoram 2.00 2.00 2.00 6.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 12.00
Nagaland 2.00 2.00 2.00 6.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 6.00 17.00
Sikkim 2.00 0.50 2.00 4.50 0.75 0.25 0.25 0.75 0.25 2.25 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00 18.75
Tripura 0.50 0.50 0.50 1.50 1.00 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 2.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 2.00 11.00 14.50
UTsAndaman & 
Nicobar0.50 2.00 2.00 4.50 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00 21.50
Chandigarh 2.00 2.00 2.00 6.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00 23.00
D & N Haveli 
& Daman & 
Diu2.00 2.00 2.00 6.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00 23.00
Delhi 2.00 1.00 0.50 3.50 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 6.00 14.50
Jammu & 
Kashmir2.00 0.50 0.50 3.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 3.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 6.00 14.00
Ladakh       0.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.00
Lakshadweep 0.50 1.00 2.00 3.50 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 3.00 11.50
Puducherry 0.50 0.50 0.50 1.50 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 5.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 6.50
Score: < 25% : 0 25%-50% : 1 50%-75% : 2 > 75% : 3
Annexures
129
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Programme activities and intervention coverage, WCD
   % of pregnant 
women who 
received THR 
for 21+ days% of lactating 
women who 
received THR 
for 21+ days% of children 
6-36 mo who 
received THR 
for 21+ days% of children 
0-5 years 
who were 
weighedDomain 4: Program 
activities and 
intervention 
coverage
  Max value 3 3 3 3 12
Large StatesAndhra Pradesh 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Assam 3.00 3.00 3.00   9.00
Bihar 2.00 2.00 2.00 0.00 6.00
Chattisgarh 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Gujarat 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Haryana 2.00 2.00 2.00 3.00 9.00
Himachal Pradesh 3.00 3.00 3.00 2.00 11.00
Jharkhand 3.00 3.00 3.00 2.00 11.00
Karnataka 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Kerala 3.00 3.00 3.00 0.00 9.00
Madhya Pradesh 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Maharashtra 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Odisha 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Punjab 3.00 3.00 2.00 3.00 11.00
Rajasthan 3.00 3.00 3.00   9.00
Tamil Nadu 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Telangana 3.00 3.00 3.00 1.00 10.00
Uttar Pradesh 0.00   3.00 2.00 5.00
Uttarakhand 3.00 3.00 3.00   9.00
Small StatesArunachal Pradesh       0.00 0.00
Goa 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Manipur         0.00
Meghalaya 3.00 3.00 3.00 2.00 11.00
Mizoram 3.00 3.00 3.00 2.00 11.00
Nagaland       1.00 1.00
Sikkim 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Tripura 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
UTsAndaman & Nicobar 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Chandigarh 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
D & N Haveli & Daman 
& Diu3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Delhi 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Jammu & Kashmir 1.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 7.00
Ladakh 3.00 3.00 3.00 0.00 9.00
Lakshadweep 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Puducherry 3.00 1.00 3.00 1.00 8.00
Score: < 25% : 0 25%-50% : 1 50%-75% : 2 > 75% : 3
130
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresService delivery essentials, Health
   % of sub 
centres 
functional% of CHCs 
functional% of 
HWCs 
functional1.1: Infrastruc -
ture% of ANM 
posts 
filled1.2: 
Human 
ResourceDomain 
1: Service 
delivery 
essentials
  Max value 3 3 3 9 3 3 12
Large 
StatesAndhra Pradesh 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Assam 3.00 3.00 2.00 8.00 3.00 3.00 11.00
Bihar 2.00 1.00 1.00 4.00 2.00 2.00 6.00
Chattisgarh 3.00 3.00 2.00 8.00 3.00 3.00 11.00
Gujarat 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Haryana 3.00 3.00 1.00 7.00 3.00 3.00 10.00
Himachal Pradesh 3.00 3.00 1.00 7.00 2.00 2.00 9.00
Jharkhand 3.00 3.00 2.00 8.00 3.00 3.00 11.00
Karnataka 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Kerala 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Madhya Pradesh 3.00 3.00 1.00 7.00 3.00 3.00 10.00
Maharashtra 3.00 3.00 1.00 7.00 3.00 3.00 10.00
Odisha 3.00 3.00 2.00 8.00 3.00 3.00 11.00
Punjab 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00     9.00
Rajasthan 3.00 3.00 1.00 7.00 3.00 3.00 10.00
Tamil Nadu 3.00 3.00 1.00 7.00 3.00 3.00 10.00
Telangana 3.00 3.00 2.00 8.00 3.00 3.00 11.00
Uttar Pradesh 3.00 3.00 1.00 7.00 2.00 2.00 9.00
Uttarakhand 3.00 3.00 1.00 7.00 3.00 3.00 10.00
Small 
StatesArunachal Pradesh 2.00 3.00 1.00 6.00 3.00 3.00 9.00
Goa 3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Manipur 3.00 3.00 1.00 7.00 3.00 3.00 10.00
Meghalaya 3.00 3.00 2.00 8.00 3.00 3.00 11.00
Mizoram       0.00     0.00
Nagaland 3.00 2.00 3.00 8.00 3.00 3.00 11.00
Sikkim 3.00 3.00 2.00 8.00 3.00 3.00 11.00
Tripura 3.00 3.00 2.00 8.00 2.00 2.00 10.00
UTsAndaman & 
Nicobar3.00 3.00 2.00 8.00 3.00 3.00 11.00
Chandigarh   3.00 3.00 6.00 3.00 3.00 9.00
D & N Haveli & 
Daman & Diu3.00 3.00 3.00 9.00 3.00 3.00 12.00
Delhi 3.00 3.00   6.00 3.00 3.00 9.00
Jammu & Kashmir 3.00 3.00 2.00 8.00 3.00 3.00 11.00
Ladakh 3.00 3.00 1.00 7.00 3.00 3.00 10.00
Lakshadweep 2.00 3.00 3.00 8.00 3.00 3.00 11.00
Puducherry 3.00 3.00 1.00 7.00 3.00 3.00 10.00
Score: < 25% : 0 25%-50% : 1 50%-75% : 2 > 75% : 3
Annexures
131
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Programme activities and intervention coverage, Health
   
% of newborn breastfed within one 
hour of birth
% of children (12-23 mo) fully 
immunized
% of children (6-59 mo) provided at 
least 8-10 doses of IFA syrup
% of pregnant women who registered 
for ANC in the first trimester
% of pregnant women who received 
4 or more ANCs
% of pregnant women who were 
given 180 IFA tablets Mar 2020
% of lactating women who were 
given 180 IFA tablets
% of 5-9 years children who were 
given weekly IFA tablets
% of pregnant women given TT2/
booster in Mar 2020
% of pregnant women given 1 
Albendazole tablet after first trimes
% of children (0-59 mo) diarrhoea 
cases reported treated with ORS
% of home visits to household with 
pregnant mothers to counsel on  
practices during pregnancy
2.1: Program activities
Has IFA been included in the EDL?
Has the State procured digital 
invasive hemoglobinometers?
2.2_AMB strategy
Domain 2: Program activities and 
intervention coverage
  Max value 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 36 1 1 2 38
  Score:< 25% 
: 0 
25%-
50% 
: 1 
50%-
75% 
: 2 
> 75% 
: 3< 25% 
: 0 
25%-
50% 
: 1 
50%-
75% 
: 2 
> 75% 
: 3< 25% 
: 0 
25%-
50% 
: 1 
50%-
75% 
: 2 
> 75% 
: 3< 25% 
: 0 
25%-
50% 
: 1 
50%-
75% 
: 2 
> 75% 
: 3< 25% 
: 0 
25%-
50% 
: 1 
50%-
75% 
: 2 
> 75% 
: 3< 25% 
: 0 
25%-
50% 
: 1 
50%-
75% 
: 2 
> 75% 
: 3< 25% 
: 0 
25%-
50% 
: 1 
50%-
75% 
: 2 
> 75% 
: 3< 25% 
: 0 
25%-
50% 
: 1 
50%-
75% 
: 2 
> 75% 
: 3< 25% 
: 0 
25%-
50% 
: 1 
50%-
75% 
: 2 
> 75% 
: 3< 25% 
: 0 
25%-
50% 
: 1 
50%-
75% 
: 2 
> 75% 
: 3< 25% 
: 0 
25%-
50% 
: 1 
50%-
75% 
: 2 
> 75% 
: 3< 25% 
: 0 
25%-
50% : 1  
50%-
75% : 2  
> 75% 
: 3 Yet to 
begin 
: 0 
In 
process 
: 0.5 
Com-
pleted: 1Yet to begin 
: 0 
In process 
: 0.5 
Completed: 
1   
Large 
StatesAndhra Pradesh 3.00 3.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 2.00 1.00 3.00 1.00 3.00 1.00 26.00 1.00 1.00 2.00 28.00
Assam 3.00 3.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 0.00 3.00 2.00 3.00 2.00 29.00 1.00 0.50 1.50 30.50
Bihar 3.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 2.00 3.00 1.00 0.00 3.00 1.00     15.00 1.00 0.50 1.50 16.50
Chattisgarh 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 2.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 26.00 1.00 0.50 1.50 27.50
Gujarat 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00   24.00 1.00 0.50 1.50 25.50
Haryana 3.00 3.00 2.00 3.00 2.00 3.00 1.00 0.00 3.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 28.00 1.00 1.00 2.00 30.00
Himachal 
Pradesh3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 2.00 3.00   3.00 3.00 2.00 3.00 2.00 30.00 1.00 0.50 1.50 31.50
Jharkhand 3.00 3.00 0.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 0.00 3.00 1.00 1.00 3.00 25.00 1.00 0.50 1.50 26.50
Karnataka 3.00 3.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00   3.00 2.00 3.00 2.00 28.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 29.00
132
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresKerala 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 0.00   2.00 0.00 0.00   14.00 1.00 1.00 2.00 16.00
Madhya Pradesh 3.00 3.00 0.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 2.00 3.00 2.00 3.00 0.00 27.00 1.00 0.50 1.50 28.50
Maharashtra 3.00 3.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 2.00 1.00 3.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 30.00 1.00 1.00 2.00 32.00
Odisha 3.00   1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 29.00 1.00 1.00 2.00 31.00
Punjab 3.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00   0.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 10.00 0.50 0.50 1.00 11.00
Rajasthan 0.00   0.00 2.00 2.00 1.00 3.00   3.00 2.00 3.00   16.00 0.50 0.50 1.00 17.00
Tamil Nadu 2.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 0.00 2.00 3.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 23.00 1.00 0.50 1.50 24.50
Telangana 3.00 3.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 3.00 2.00 2.00 3.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 29.00 1.00 1.00 2.00 31.00
Uttar Pradesh 3.00 3.00 0.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 0.00 3.00 1.00 3.00   24.00 1.00 0.50 1.50 25.50
Uttarakhand 3.00 3.00 0.00 2.00 2.00 3.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 0.00 1.00 3.00 25.00 1.00 0.50 1.50 26.50
Small 
StatesArunachal 
Pradesh3.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 2.00 1.00 0.00 2.00 0.00   0.00 10.00 1.00 0.50 1.50 11.50
Goa 3.00   0.00 2.00 3.00 2.00 3.00   1.00 1.00 3.00   18.00 1.00 1.00 2.00 20.00
Manipur 3.00 1.00 0.00 2.00 2.00 1.00 1.00   2.00 0.00 1.00   13.00 0.50 0.50 1.00 14.00
Meghalaya 3.00 3.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.00   2.00 0.00 0.00   11.00 1.00 0.50 1.50 12.50
Mizoram                         0.00     0.00 0.00
Nagaland 2.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00     5.00 1.00 1.00 2.00 7.00
Sikkim 2.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 2.00 2.00 3.00 0.00 3.00 1.00 0.00 3.00 24.00 1.00 0.50 1.50 25.50
Tripura 3.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00   3.00 12.00 1.00 0.50 1.50 13.50
UTsAndaman & 
Nicobar3.00 3.00 1.00 2.00 3.00 2.00 1.00 2.00 3.00 2.00 0.00 3.00 25.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 26.00
Chandigarh 3.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 2.00     22.00 0.50 0.50 1.00 23.00
D & N Haveli & 
Daman & Diu3.00 3.00 1.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 3.00 2.00 3.00 27.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 28.00
Delhi 2.00 0.00   2.00 3.00 3.00 1.00   1.00 1.00   1.00 14.00 1.00 0.50 1.50 15.50
Jammu & 
Kashmir3.00 3.00 0.00 2.00 3.00 2.00 3.00 0.00 2.00 0.00 1.00 3.00 22.00 1.00 0.50 1.50 23.50
Ladakh 0.00 3.00 0.00 2.00 2.00 3.00 3.00 0.00 2.00 0.00 2.00 2.00 19.00 0.50 0.50 1.00 20.00
Lakshadweep 3.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 3.00 3.00     2.00 1.00     14.00 0.50 0.50 1.00 15.00
Puducherry 0.00 0.00 3.00 1.00 2.00 3.00 0.00 3.00 1.00 3.00 0.00 3.00 19.00 0.50 1.00 1.50 20.50
Annexures
133
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
ANNEXURE 4: POSHAN ABHIYAAN II MONITORING REPORT: DATA 
COLLECTION FORM FOR MOWCD
S.No.INFORMATION REQUIRED
[May share Annexures, Figures or % 
wherever available]RESPONSE
1 Details on Flexi-Funds (till 31st March,2020):
a. State/UT wise utilization of Flexi-funds 
(in lakhs)₹ 6067.84 (Details are annexed at 
Annexure 4-A )
b. Any innovative aspect taken for utilising 
Flexi Fund
2. Convergent activities undertaken by 
MoWCD jointly by other Line Ministries 
and Departments for supporting POSHAN 
Abhiyaan (till 31st March,2020)Details are annexed at Annexure 4-B 
(As reported by Partnering Ministries 
and Departments)
3. Details on supplementary nutrition: (till 31st March,2020)
a. State-wise information on the type and 
content of Supplementary Nutrition as 
THR and Hot- cooked MealDetails are annexed at Annexure 4-D
b. State-wise information on the fortified 
Supplementary Nutrition (THR and Hot- 
cooked Meal) provided under ICDSDetails are annexed at Annexure 4-D
c. Information on the proportion of 
malnourished children who received 
increased rations under SNP rules14,23,136
(Details are annexed at Annexure 4-E)
d. Any other (specify)
4. Best practices/Innovations made by 
MoWCD, especially during COVID-19 times 
that can be scaled-up for strengthening 
Nutritional indicators in all States/UTs (Give 
State specific details)Details are annexed at Annexure 4-C
(Best practices/Innovations along with 
DO letter issued to all States/UTs by this 
Ministry )
5. Challenges faced (if any):  Manpower Shortages- vacancies at 
various levels
 Training and capacity building of 
field functionaries
 Slow roll-out of ICDS-CAS and 
procurement of GMDs
 Sustaining “Jan Andolan” activities
 Enhanced Engagement with elected 
representatives
 Multiple IT Platforms
 Low and delayed utilization of funds
 Convergence essential for expanding
 Shortage of Anganwadi buildings, 
toilets and drinking water facilities
134
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Annexures6. State/UT wise Details on POSHAN Maah 2020 :
 No. of participants 3,65,95,20,157
 No. of events 13,90,00,170
 No. of SAM children identified Not available
 No. of SAM children referred Not available 
 Other details of the event Need to be specified 
Annexures
135
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
ANNEXURE 4-A
Flexi-Funds
S.No. State/UTsFlexi Fund 
approved 
by SLSC 
committeeStatus of im -
plementation/
funds ear -
marked (Rs. in 
lakh)Funds 
Utilised 
(Rs. in 
Lakh)Activities
1 A&N Islands Yes Implementation 
Initiated 
(Rs.26.88)Rs.18.92  Organizing Suposhan 
Diwas once in a 
month during the 
month of February & 
March, 2020–nukkad 
natak, healthy baby 
showers, cooking 
champs etc.
 Celebration of Bal 
Sabha₹ in all AWC-
Awards, Prizes, 
refreshments
 Diploma course on 
Nutrition at IGNOU 
– Capacity Building 
of AWC/Mukhya 
Sevikas.
2 Andhra 
PradeshYes Implementation 
Initiated 
(Rs.650. 54)Rs.408.84  ICDS Workshop
 Anganwadi Level 
Monitoring Support 
Committee
 Printing of IEC 
Materials
 Printing of Sri Mitra 
Books
 Sub-Centre Level 
Meeting
 Multi-Sectoral CAP
 Improving Health 
and Nutrition Status 
(Tribal Areas) “100 
Days Care” IEC 
Material
 Need based modules 
(ILA- Sectoral Level)
 Growth Monitoring 
Slip Books
 Project Management 
Expense
 IEC video films
136
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresS.No. State/UTsFlexi Fund 
approved 
by SLSC 
committeeStatus of im -
plementation/
funds ear -
marked (Rs. in 
lakh)Funds 
Utilised 
(Rs. in 
Lakh)Activities
3 Arunachal 
PradeshUnder 
processProposal 
receivedRs.4.47  14.2 kg cylinder 
security deposit & 
other charges for 778 
LPG connection
 Gas Stove-778
 Refilling quarterly 
in a year @appox 
Rs.900 X 4 cylinders
4 Assam Yes Implementation 
Initiated 
(Rs.1264.34)Rs.8.32  Digital Media 
Campaign
 Capacity Building 
of State, District & 
Block Officials
 Pico Projector
 Learning Corner 
Development
 Solar Kit
 Digital Platform
5 Bihar Yes Implementation 
Initiated 
(Rs.1159.07)Rs.669.78  Refresher Training of 
AWW on ICT-RTM
 Refresher Training of 
LS on ICT-RTM
 Gap Training 
Orientation of Master 
trainers
 Solar Fan/Light 
System at AWC
 Configuration cost of 
smart phone
 LCD display monitor 
with battery and 
inverter to AWC
 BALA (Building as a 
learning aid)
6 Chandigarh Yes Implementation 
Initiated 
(Rs.46.21)Rs.46.21  Stainless Utensils
 Water Purifiers
7 Chhattisgarh Yes Under Process — —
Annexures
137
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
S.No. State/UTsFlexi Fund 
approved 
by SLSC 
committeeStatus of im -
plementation/
funds ear -
marked (Rs. in 
lakh)Funds 
Utilised 
(Rs. in 
Lakh)Activities
8 Dadra & 
Nagar HaveliYes Implementation 
Initiated (22.1)Rs.10.85  Procurement of 
ECCE Material
 Training and Capacity 
Building of AWW 
(Physical and Motor 
skill development, 
Language 
development, 
listening skill, 
Speaking skill, 
Reading preparation, 
Word wall, Teaching 
learning materials, 
stories etc.)
9 Daman and 
DiuYes Implementation 
Initiated  
(Rs. 13.83)Rs.3.00  ECCE Material-Tool 
Kit
10 Delhi Yes Under Process 
(Rs.300)Rs.29.29  Incentives to AWWs 
and AWHs for 
improving nutritional 
status of stunted and 
wasted children
11 Goa No Proposal yet to 
be received— —
12 Gujarat Yes Implementation 
Initiated 
(Rs.1439.02)Rs.755.88  Children Nutrition 
Park at “Statue of 
Unity” at Kevadiya 
Colony
 Setting up of State 
Management Centre 
(SMC)
 State level meetings, 
workshops and 
training
 ICDS CAS Dashboard 
training
 e-ILA orientation and 
certificate printing
 ILA refresher training
 Strengthening of 
District and Help 
desk team of 
POSHAN Abhiyaan
138
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresS.No. State/UTsFlexi Fund 
approved 
by SLSC 
committeeStatus of im -
plementation/
funds ear -
marked (Rs. in 
lakh)Funds 
Utilised 
(Rs. in 
Lakh)Activities
 Supportive 
supervision of 
POSHAN Abhiyaan 
components
 Strengthening 
of Financial 
Management system 
at State
13 Haryana Yes Implementation 
Initiated 
(Rs.333)Rs.24.00  Kitchen Gardening 
(Rs.1.89 core)
 Strengthening 
of monitoring 
mechanism at Block 
Level & District Level 
(Rs.1.44 crore)
14 Himachal 
PradeshYes Implementation 
InitiatedRs.231.02  Swachhta Kit @ 1146 
per AWC/ Mini AWC
15 Jammu and 
KashmirNoProposal yet to 
be received— —
16 Jharkhand Yes Under Process
— Mobile based 
application 
for supportive 
supervision
 Printing of e-ILA 
certificates.
17 Karnataka Yes Under Process 
(Rs.1151.34)Rs.117.62  Strengthening of 
CDPO offices
 Strengthening of DD 
offices
 Orientation of 
Balvikas Samithies
18 Kerala Yes Implementation 
Initiated 
(Rs.501)Rs.150.82  Setting up of DPMUs 
& Expenses
 Setting up of BPMUs
 Smartphones and 
Data Plan to AWW 
and operating Staff
 Mobile Configuration 
& MT CAS Training
19 Ladakh No — — —
Annexures
139
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
S.No. State/UTsFlexi Fund 
approved 
by SLSC 
committeeStatus of im -
plementation/
funds ear -
marked (Rs. in 
lakh)Funds 
Utilised 
(Rs. in 
Lakh)Activities
20 Lakshadweep Yes Implementation 
Initiated  
(Rs.22.79)Rs.4.30  Poshan Maah 2018-19 
(Rs.4.3 Lakh)
 Printing traditional 
culinary art book 
(Rs.5.5 Lakh)
21 Madhya 
PradeshYes Implementation 
Initiated 
(Rs.2605.17)Rs.250.31  “Angan” Nutrition 
Care Centre Angan–
Camp to established 
community-based 
management of 
severe underweight 
children
 Electricity Facility 
through Solar Panel 
at AWC
 Poshan Sakhi: This 
proposal aimed to 
utilize the second-
best opportunity in 
life to prevent and 
prevent malnutrition 
and anaemia.
22 Maharashtra Yes Implementation 
Initiated 
(Rs.1811.12)Rs.608.24  Sensitization 
of elected 
representatives of 
PRIs and Urban local 
bodies
 Joint workshops 
of health & ICDS 
to promote 
behaviour change 
communication
 Training of 
Supervisors 
on supervisor 
Application of CAS
 Induction-cum-
training of State, 
District, and Block-
Helpdesk staff
 Training of State, 
District officials 
and CDPOs on 
Dashboard
140
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresS.No. State/UTsFlexi Fund 
approved 
by SLSC 
committeeStatus of im -
plementation/
funds ear -
marked (Rs. in 
lakh)Funds 
Utilised 
(Rs. in 
Lakh)Activities
 Review Meeting of 
District and Block 
level help desk
 Travel cost of ICDS 
officials (JPCs and 
Nodal officer) to 
Delhi/ other lo cation 
for GOI meetings
 Quick research study 
on cultural no rms 
to understand the 
factors inhibiting 
behaviour change 
communication in 
order to achieve the 
goals of POSHAN 
Abhiyaan. The State 
is going to sign 
MoU with T.H. Chan 
Research Center, 
Mumbai under 
Harvard University
23 Manipur Yes Under Process 
(Rs.61.6)Under 
process Plan for slogan, 
essay and drawing 
competition on safe 
drinking water/ 
healthy eating habits
 Promoting Nutri 
Garden in 16 
POSHAN Abhiyaan 
Districts
 Provision of 
electricity to 500 
pucca AWC @ 
Rs.5,000/- per AWC
24 Meghalaya Yes Implementation 
InitiatedRs.150.24  Printing of Flip 
Books: 6170 nos.
 Printing of takeaways
Annexures
141
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
S.No. State/UTsFlexi Fund 
approved 
by SLSC 
committeeStatus of im -
plementation/
funds ear -
marked (Rs. in 
lakh)Funds 
Utilised 
(Rs. in 
Lakh)Activities
25 Mizoram Yes Implementation 
I nitiated 
(Rs.88.5 6)Rs.88.56  POSHAN related 
travel expenses. 
Specially for the 
District and Block 
staff recruited under 
POSHAN Abhiyaan
 Expenses at ILA 
training at sectoral 
levels and other 
miscellaneous 
POSHAN activity-
related Expenses
 District and Block 
IT infrastructure and 
equipment
26 Nagaland Yes Implementation 
InitiatedRs.213.55  One Time Grant to 
AWC for CBE
 Purchase of 
Smokeless Chullas 
for Peren Districts
 Establishment of 22 
Nutri-Gardens
 ILA Takeaways for 
21 Modules (25 
Takeaways)
 ICDS-CAS Training 
for AWWs, LS, DPOs, 
CDPOs & State 
Officials
27 Odisha — — — —
28 Puducherry Yes Implementation 
I nitiated (10.95)Rs.8.50  Conﬁguration of 
Mobile Devices
 Printing of Takeaways 
to the AWW
 ICDS-CAS Training to 
AWW
 Painting of AWC 
with the POSHAN 
Abhiyaan themes
 Provision of I.D. 
Cards to AWWs
29 Punjab Yes Under Process 
(Rs.292.4)Under 
Process Upgradation of AWC 
to Model AWC
142
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresS.No. State/UTsFlexi Fund 
approved 
by SLSC 
committeeStatus of im -
plementation/
funds ear -
marked (Rs. in 
lakh)Funds 
Utilised 
(Rs. in 
Lakh)Activities
30 Rajasthan Yes Implementation 
Initiated  
(Rs. 128 8.21)Rs.246.92  Configuration of 
Smartphones & ICT-
RTM (LS & AWWs)
 Refresher Training on 
CAS & ILA
 Strengthening of 
CDPO offices
 Strengthening of DDs 
Offices
 Web Based 
Monitoring 
Information System
 Printing of Monthly 
Single Register
 Maintenance & 
Repair/AMC (Growth 
Monitoring Devices)
 Orientation 
Workshops
 Orientation of PRIs
 Exposure/Study 
Visit/Review 
Monitoring
31 Sikkim Yes Implementation 
Initiated
(Rs 49.98)Rs.49.98  Celebration of 
3rd Anniversary 
of Launching of 
POSHAN Abhiyaan
 POSHAN Phagwada
 Provision of VC Lab 
at SPMU
 World Breast 
Feeding Week
 International Yoga 
Day
 World Health Day
 Village Health 
Sanitation and 
Nutrition Day
Annexures
143
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
S.No. State/UTsFlexi Fund 
approved 
by SLSC 
committeeStatus of im -
plementation/
funds ear -
marked (Rs. in 
lakh)Funds 
Utilised 
(Rs. in 
Lakh)Activities
32 Tamil Nadu Yes Implementation 
Initiated  
(Rs.516.95)Rs.248.73  Electricity to 220 
AWC
 Printing and Supply 
of Handbook on 
Growth Monitoring 
Devices
 Printing and supply 
of guidelines in Tamil 
language
 Expenditure on 
convening the 
Convergence Plan 
Committee meeting 
at State/Districts/
Blocks
 Procurement of LCD 
Projector for 32 
Districts
 Imparting orientation, 
induction & 
sensitization training
 Promoting Kitchen 
Garden in 655 AWC
 Six-seater table chair 
kit
 Mobile configuration 
& preparation of 
devices training to 
Help Desk Personnel 
(Phase I & II Districts)
33 Telangana — — — —
34 Tripura Under 
processProposal 
received— —
35 Uttar 
PradeshYes Implementation 
initiated (Rs. 20
42.03)Rs.1401.97  Suposhan Swasth 
Mela
 Flip Book
36 Uttarakhand Yes Implementation 
initiated 
(Rs.697.12)Rs. 317.52  Hydroponic Farming
 Solar Cooker
 Recipe Book
37 West Bengal No Proposal yet to 
be  received— —
Total Rs.6067.84
144
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresANNEXURE 4-B
Convergence activities undertaken by partner Ministries/
Departments under POSHAN Abhiyaan
S. No. Ministry Activity
1. Ministry of Youth 
Affairs & Sports
Dept. of Sports The Department supports and encourages balance and 
nutritious diet for a good health.
 The Department has launched Fit India Movement in August, 
2019, which cover all aspects having a bearing on fitness and 
healthy living viz., physical fitness, mental fitness, healthy life 
style, preventive health care, sustainable and environment 
friendly living, etc. including healthy eating habits, healthy 
and balance diet.
 The Department has rationalized the diet and food supplement 
charges under which financial assistance towards diet, food 
supplements are provided to all athletes whether Senior, 
Junior or Sub Junior athletes. Earlier Senior, Junior athletes 
and SAI trainees had different diets which has been done 
away with to ensure parity amongst all level of trainees.
2. Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare Intensified Mission Indradhanush 2.0 was launched in 
December 2019 and 4 rounds were conducted from 
December 2019 to March 2020. During these rounds about 
37.09 lakh children and 7.41 lakh pregnant women were 
vaccinated.
 Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine (PCV) vaccination is in 6 
States-HP, Bihar, MP, Rajasthan, UP, and Haryana. Introduced 
PCV on its own. In last 6 months:
 PCV expanded to 17 Districts of Rajasthan, to cover entire 
State.
 Expansion in UP to remaining 56 Districts started. Already 
covering 19 Districts.
 More than 49 lakh doses administered from January 2020 
to April 2020
 Rotavirus vaccine (RVV) has already been expanded to the 
entire country, by September 2019. More than 1.8 crore doses 
administered from January 2020 to April 2020.
 National Deworming Day (NDD) was conducted in 25 States/
UTs11.3 Cr children were covered with average 94% coverage 
as per the target set by States and UTs
 Under Home Based Newborn Care (HBNC) programme 
46.92 lakhs newborns received complete schedule of home 
visits by ASHA. 2.5 lakhs sick newborns referred to health 
facilities
 Under Home Based Care for Young Child (HBYC) programme:
 Out of 242 Districts, 238 Districts have completed trainers 
training
Annexures
145
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
S. No. Ministry Activity
 1,60,339 frontline workers are trained covering 179 
Districts across 27 States/UTs
 1,83,975 children received scheduled visits in 39 Districts 
(including 22 Aspirational Districts) from 11 States/UTs.
 Institutional Deliveries: 94% deliveries reported in the 
hospitals against total number of reported deliveries. (i.e. 
1.97 crore deliveries conducted in hospital out of total 2.08 
crore deliveries reported); 70% of delivery reported in public 
health facilities.
 LBW: 12.6% of the newborn were reported as LBW as per 
HMIS
 Antenatal Check-up: 71% ANC registered in the 1sty trimester; 
80% PW received 4 or more ANC check-ups
 IFA supplementation: 91% PW given 180 IFA tablets.
 Community and Home distribution of IFA supplementation 
from Jan-May’ 20 through community and home distribution: 
6-59 months- 1.62 Cr; 5-9 years: 1.38 Cr; 10-19 years: 1.83 Cr
 Vitamin-A supplementation: 69.83 lakhs children were 
provided with 1st dose of vitamin-A supplementation
 RBSK: As reported by State/UTs in Q-4 of January 2020 to 
March 2020:
 0-3 years’ children: 1.2 crores were screened; 5.95 lakhs 
children were identified with any of 4Ds including 18,607 
defects at birth, 32,144 developmental delays, 1.9 lakhs 
Deficiency and 3.54 lakhs diseases; 3.16 lakhs children availed 
services at secondary tertiary care institute
 4-6 years’ children: 1.07 crores were screened; 9.21 lakhs 
children were identified with any of 4Ds including 12,034 
defects at birth, 51,721 developmental delays, 2.5 lakhs 
Deficiency and 6.07 lakhs diseases
 4.91 lakhs children availed services at secondary tertiary care 
institute
States/UTs.
States/UTs have been requested to operationalize the 
blending of fortified rice and its distribution through PDS as 
early as possible. So far
 15 State Governments i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka, 
Maharashtra, Odisha, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Assam, Tamil 
Nadu, Telangana, Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya 
Pradesh & Uttarakhand have consented for implementation 
of the Pilot Scheme.
 Out of these 15 States, Maharashtra (from Feb. 2020), 
Gujarat (from Feb. 2020) & Andhra Pradesh (from April 
2020) have started distributing of fortified rice under the 
Pilot Scheme.
146
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresS. No. Ministry Activity
 Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS)/National Food 
Security Act, 2013 (NFSA): Covers all States & UTs; Poorest 
of poor entitled 35 kg foodgrains per family per month; 
priority household entitled to 5 kg foodgrains per person 
per month at uniform subsidized price Rs. 3/2/1 per kg for 
rice/wheat/coarse grains respectively.
 Special provisions for pregnant women, lactating mothers 
and children aged 6 months-14 years entitled to free 
nutritious meal through ICDS network and MDMS.
 Higher nutritional norms have been prescribed for 
malnourished children up to 6 years of age.
 Pregnant women and lactating mothers are entitled to 
receive cash maternity benefit of Rs. 6,000 for the wage 
loss during the period
5. Ministry of Jal 
Shakti
Dept. of Drinking 
Water & SanitationProvision for providing safe drinking water in adequate 
quantity of prescribed quality to public institutions such 
as Gram Panchayat buildings, schools, AWC, health centres 
through functional household tap connection under “Jal 
Jeevan Mission”.
6. National Service 
Scheme Poster making competition on nutritional values
 Seminars and workshops on poshan and its benefits
 Wall paintings in public places on theme of poshan/nutrition
 Nukkad Nataks, Rallies and door-to-door campaign in NSS 
adopted villages/slums on importance of nutrition, girl 
education, hygiene and sanitation, Anaemia, etc.
 Classroom lectures on adolescent healthy diet
 Awareness sessions on eating disorder, lack of physical 
activity, malnutrition, obesity, impact of fast food/soft drink/
packaged food, importance of balanced diet
 Activities: 587 activities undertaken
 Volunteers: 1,56,101 volunteers were involved
 Participation: 1,74,532 beneficiaries participated
7. Nehru Yuva Kendra 
Sangathan Display of banners and other publicity material highlighting 
core issues of poshan covering 9,354 villages
 3,565 meetings were held with eminent citizens to sensitize 
the villagers about importance of poshan
 369 gosthi, lectures and discussions were conducted by 
eminent resource persons on focus areas of poshan.
 Door to door campaign in 289 villages focusing on general 
cleanliness & hygiene, prevention of anaemia, regular de-
worming methods, Say No to Tobacco use, alcohol & drugs 
and maintenance & adequate sanitation facilities in the village
 Distribution of IEC material on Poshan Maah in 289 villages. 
Total 1,368 activities which included Rallies, Run, Pad Yatra, 
Cycle Yatra,
 Cultural Programmes, Nukkad Nataks, Short Film Shows, 
Exhibitions, Competitions were conducted to focus public 
attention on focus areas of Poshan Maah
Annexures
147
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
S. No. Ministry Activity
8. Dpt. of School 
Education & 
Literacy Developed cadre of 3,20,373 Poshan Monitors
 7,40,045 Poshan Report cards prepared
9. Dept. of 
Agriculture, 
Cooperation 
& Farmers’ 
Welfare, Ministry 
of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare Nutri-cereals comprising Jowar, Bajra, Ragi/Mandua, Kutki, 
Kodo, Sawa/Jhangora, Kangni/Kakun and Cheena have been 
implemented in the National Food Security Mission since 
2018-19 in 202 Districts of 14 States.
 Promotion of nutri-cereals through Kisan Goshthis, training 
at KVK level, SAU and State Agriculture Dept. Provision of 
safe grain storage.
 Other interventions include cluster front line demonstrations, 
creation of seed hubs, distribution of seed kits, print & 
electronic publicity, etc.
 Establishment of three “Centres of Excellence‟ across the 
country. Provision of setting up of processing units.
 Bio-fortified and high-yielding crop distribution through 
seeds and FLD.
10. Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs Evaluation undertaken on “Scheduled Tribe Component 
Relevance and Effectiveness in GoI Funded Schemes‟ which 
included POSHAN Abhiyaan, Anganwadi Services-ICDS, 
PMMVY, NIPCCD, etc.
Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying:
 “Eklavya Kamdhenu Project‟ envisions to establish 
„Gaushalas‟ under “Rashtriya Kamedhenu Aayog” in EMRSs 
with a view to provide Desi cow’s milk and milk products for 
self-sustainability towards milk consumption among school 
children to improve their nutritional status.
 In addition, community nutrition approaches in and around 
the EMRS school will be used to further address dietary 
diversity in tribal households.
11. Ministry of Minority 
Affairs Interventions in the form of trainings, community mobilisation 
or assisting States in creation of AWC.
12. Ministry of AYUSH  Generating nutrition awareness through Health and Nutrition 
camps and lectures through its national institutes.
 The Ministry has also shared yoga protocol for pregnancy, 
children and adolescent with MoWCD to incorporate it into 
POSHAN Abhiyaan.
 The Ministry is actively participating in the Poshan Pakhwada 
and Poshan Maah every year.
 Introduction of Yoga activities in schools in collaboration of 
Department of School Education and Literacy, MHRD
 Introduction of poshan awareness in AYUSH Health and 
Wellness Centres in collaboration with local AWC.
 Awareness programme for Herbal plants with high nutritional 
value in AYUSH Health and Wellness Centres
148
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresS. No. Ministry Activity
13. Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj Held special gram sabha with the participation from 
community resource persons, ANMs, Sakhis etc for:
 Identification of pregnant women and local nutritional food 
in GP area
 Discuss list of available supplementary foods in the 
Anganwadi for disbursement to beneficiary
 Discuss subjects of education, safety, reproductive health, 
equal opportunity
 Highlight the importance of sanitization, immunisation and 
institutional delivery
 Undertaking of Poshan Jan Andolan
 Implementing the centrally sponsored scheme of RGSA to 
strengthen PRIs through capacity building & training
14. Ministry of Rural 
Development Provision of providing funds for convergence with MGNREGS 
e.g. AWC buildings.
 Under the provision of MGNREGA, in case the number of 
children below the age of five years accompanying the 
women working at any site is five or more, provisions shall 
be made to depute one of such women workers to look 
after such children. The person so deputed shall be paid 
wage rate.
 The most marginalized women in the locality, women in 
exploitative conditions, or bonded labour or those vulnerable 
to being trafficked or liberated manual scavengers should be 
employed for providing child care services.
 Under the mandate of MGNREGA, the District Programme 
Coordinator shall ensure that at least 60% of the works to 
be taken up in a District in terms of cost shall be for creation 
of productive assets directly linked to agriculture and allied 
activities through development of land, water and trees.
 A convergence Framework for scientific planning and 
execution of water management works with the use of 
latest technology has been mandated in consultation with 
an agreement of the MoJS and the MoAFW was issued
15. Ministry of New & 
Renewable Energy Providing solar panel to Anganwari Kendras: MNRE Scheme 
for off- grid solar PV Ph-III was closed on 31.3.2020 and now 
available only for NE States.
16. Ministry of Housing 
& Urban Affairs An advisory was issued to all the States/UTs requesting to 
incorporate AWC in DPRs for In-Situ Slum Redevelopment 
(ISSR) and Affordable Housing in Partnership (AHP) projects 
wherever gaps exist.
 An advisory was issued to the States requesting to use 
the allocated budget for ODF (IHHT, CT/PT, Urinal) under 
Swachh Bharat Mission-Urban (SBM-U) for construction of 
Toilets/Urinals in AWC situated within the jurisdiction of the 
Municipal Corporations in their States/UTs.
Annexures
149
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
S. No. Ministry Activity
17. NITI Aayog  CSR funding in health & nutrition programmes: Mobilisation 
of Rs.70.4 crore in 57 Aspirational Districts
 Involvement of PRI in Jan Andolan for nutrition: Training 
modules have been developed and 1st ToT has been 
conducted by NIRD, Hyderabad; Training roll-out in 25 
Aspirational Districts covering 1 lakh members; 15,000 
members sensitised on risk migration and COVID-19 
awareness in 25 Aspirational Districts.
 Periodic surveys undertaken for monitoring progress of 
POSHAN Abhiyaan in 25 Aspirational Districts
 Rice fortification to be undertaken by Dept. of Food & Public 
Distribution in 15 Districts as a pilot programme.
 Biannual monitoring reports on POSHAN Abhiyaan and 
quarterly monitoring reports on PMMVY
 Evaluation study conducted on strengthening of ICDS; draft 
report with recommendations shared with MoWCD
 Promotion of healthy diets through local food systems
150
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresANNEXURE 4-C
Best practices/innovations made by MoWCD, especially during COVID-19 times that 
can be scaled-up for strengthening Nutritional indicators in all States/UTs, following 
are the activities that have been undertaken by CD-Section during the COVID-19 
pandemic
 ÂRegarding initiatives taken by AWW in view of the COVID-19 outbreak, an 
advisory DO letter dated 11th March, 2020 was issued to all States/UTs forwarding 
therewith the tasks assigned to this Ministry regarding COVID-19 as under:
 Facilitate utilization of AWW and Supervisors in surveillance and other 
community level activities by MoH&FW.
 Facilitate mobilization of SHGs to create awareness.
 Proper sanitation at AWC and health education to children and their parents.
Further, AWW and Anganwadi Helpers are also actively involved in conducting other 
activities during COVID-19 such as door to door survey, community surveillance, etc.
 ÂRegarding functioning of AWC during the present circumstances, the distribution 
of food items and nutrition support by AWWs, once in 15 days, at the doorstep 
of beneficiaries – children, women and lactating mothers has been permitted 
as per the guidelines issued by Ministry of Home Affairs. Regarding this, a letter 
dated 16.04.2020 followed by a DO letter dated 19.05.2020 was issued to all 
States/UTs by this Ministry.
 ÂRegarding special initiatives taken under Anganwadi Services, it is stated that in 
view of the special circumstances prevailing in the country due to the COVID-19 
pandemic, the life cover for AWW/Anganwadi Helpers in the age group of 51-59 
years (closed group as on 01.06.2017) has been increased from ₹ 30,000/- to ₹ 
2,00,000/- primarily for a period of three months i.e. upto 30.06.2020.Further, 
POSHAN Abhiyaan was itself set up for improving the nutritional standards of 
children in the country. Therefore, POSHAN Abhiyaan may also incorporate some 
points in the point no. 4 mentioned as above.
Best practices shared by some of the States/UTs, can be scaled-up 
for strengthening Nutritional indicators
1. Lakshadweep – Establishing Nutri-gardens in and around Anganwadi
Key highlights
 ÂLakshadweep has 107 Anganwadi spread over 10 Islands. There is no COVID-19 
case reported in entire UT, still the adverse effect of COVID-19 is on the supply 
of green leafy vegetables/fruits can be seen.
 ÂThe concept of Anganwadi Kitchen gardens was initiated in Lakshadweep, with 
each Anganwadi adopting 15 houses. To initiate the same, UT’s main focus was 
on Convergence of WCD, Agriculture, Rural Development & Village Panchayats.
Annexures
151
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
 ÂIn March 2020, UT has started distributing the seeds. So far, 99 clusters 
at UT level already initiated Anganwadi Kitchens. Each having 30 families i.e. 
3000 households (besides 1600 around the AWC) benefitted. Lakshadweep 
has targeted to cover 4600 households & 107 AWC with a budgetary provision 
of around Rs.3200/- per target household. UT promotes organic foods from 
last 15 years. Since the land is scarce, and sandy, so they grow in coconut 
canopies – the Grow Bags.
 ÂLakshadweep has aimed to feed all 65,000 population through this initiative, 
and to actively initiate the same, 440 SHGs are involved in fruits and vegetables 
promotion across the UT. To implement it effectively, 60 multi-skill employee 
are trained in the field of Nutri-gardens who support all the so far formed 
99 clusters. UT’s idea is to make the Nutri-garden profitable, so that peoples’ 
economic factors can be addressed across the UT. Vegetable exchange 
programme has also been initiated by the UT.
2.   Gujarat – Online tracking and adoption of severe underweight children 
through Jan Bhagidari
Key highlights
 ÂGujarat’s focus during Poshan Maah 2020 is Community Participation and 
Ownership. State emphasized on key 5 points needed to address malnutrition–
First 1000 days; Anaemia, Diarrhoea, Sanitation and Complementary feeding 
while banking on effective Convergence with 8 Departments.
 ÂKey interventions undertaken by the State are namely EkBalak, EkPalak – which 
is being initiated by the Chief Minister and followed by other officials, Mukhya 
Mantra SuposhitGujatarNidhi– to improve the overall malnutrition scenario 
of the State, and State Management Centres– to communicate with the Field 
Functionaries and other stakeholders.
 ÂKey results of such interventions includes–70,000 severe underweight children 
adopted by PaalakWali (Guardians) , Unique IDs of 1.08 lakh severe 
underweight children have been created for follow up purpose, Phone calls 
are being made for tracking of THR, monitoring of home visits made by AWWs 
and getting feedback of Paalakwalis, Badges, certificates and guidelines 
distributed to Paalakwalis to motivate them, and Communication established 
through State Management Centre (SMC) .
 ÂOther nutrition specific initiatives taken by the State includes– PuShTI 
(Poshan Umbrella for supply chain through Tech-innovation) for ensuring 
transparency, quality, efficiency and accountability in THR distribution. This has 
also been recognized as a best practice by NITI AYOG. Promotion of anaemia 
prevention in pregnant women and adolescent girls through the use of iron 
utensils and promotion of Nutri garden. Also, 1870 low cost hand wash models 
being installed at AWC and community places to improve hygiene practices 
without wasting water.
152
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Annexures3.   Odisha – Revamping Supplementary Nutrition Programme & Introduction 
of Millets in SNP
Key highlights
 ÂState has highlighted the decentralized model of supplies of SNP across 
72,000 AWC, while focusing on the unaffected distribution of THR during the 
recent floods. For this, the State has engaged 548 SHGs in THR production 
and distribution i.e. for roasting, weighing, package and distribution of grains. 
Additionally, the State has also formed ajaanch-committee at every AWC 
which is responsible to promote transparency.
 ÂState has also shared that they have made guidelines for financial engagement 
of SHGs. Every 23rd of the month is dedicated for packaging and better 
monitoring. This additionally streamlines end to end tracking of indents and 
payments of online bills. Also, quality is the key factor monitored consistently 
by the State. For this, IT interventions are focused to make the Supply Chain 
robust. Geo-tagging, with pictures is an added feature of the same, which 
works from production to distribution. State has mentioned that the system 
has enhanced transparency, accountability, quality, monitoring, and thus the 
improved nutrition status. Nutrition distribution is tracked at multi- level from 
Field Functionaries to CDPO to SHG, while effectively engaging them all for 
the jobs assigned to each one of them.
 ÂState further has multi-sectoral plan and additional plans for hard to reach 
areas. State’s adoption system for SAM and MAM is in place and the focus 
is on complementary feeding for which fish-based food distribution is being 
taken as a pilot. Creshes have also been initiated in several areas of the 
State. Similarly, to reach out to the children who can’t reache the AWC, a 
system is being formulated – AWC to pada . State has also distributed baby 
furniture through District mineral funds
4.   Uttarakhand – Adoption of SAM children by Government officials, 
Public Representative and public
Key highlights
 ÂUttarakhand has discussed on adoption of SAM by officials, public 
representatives and public. State has further stated that Nutrition is 
multi-disciplinary in the State, and it includes sanitation, hygiene etc. In 
continuation to last year’s initiative by the Hon’ble Chief Minister, officials 
were requested to adopt one child each which resulted in adoption of 9177 
SAM/MAM children. Similarly, 1962 children freed from SAM/MAM category 
and 385 children upgraded.
 ÂThe schemes and efforts of government were made more reachable and 
the concept of ‘Sarkar Aapke Dwar’ (Govt. at your doorstep) was actualized. 
People were sensitized towards malnutrition and its ill effect on the growth 
Annexures
153
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
and overall development of their children and were made aware of the totality 
of the causes that can affect health of a family. Convergence helps addressing 
the multi- dimensional problems of SAM and MAM. Under Flexi-fund the 
State has promoted distribution of sprouted food. State has also launched 
Sanjeevani Programme (on 3rd Sep, 2019) in which Rs.2,000 per month for 
6 months given to each child. Under this programme, prescriptions from PHC, 
along with the edibles are being distributed to target children.
5.  DNH and D&D – Identification Drive for SAM Children
Key highlights
 ÂD&NH and D&D are tribally dominated territories and has high prevalence of 
malnutrition amongst children, as compared to national average. State shared 
that during COVID-19 they have 100% coverage for THR and the consumption 
issues are also being addressed. State has esp. engaged District Collectors 
with the H&FW as a result of which 25,800 out of 28,000 children measured 
during the said drive. This drive covers 4 steps namely– Growth Monitoring, 
Screening (MOs/paediatricians), diet diversity, and counselling of all concerned.
 ÂUT has also shared that the locally used ICD based systems is being developed 
and functional. Micro-plan for each AWC to identify each SAM is in place. 
They have prepared SoP of the same and trained the AWWs through nodal 
officers. To create transparency, parents are also involved in the activity.
 ÂIn the joint drive, H&FW takes upper arm circumference while WCD for height 
& weight, finally, an MO looks after the same. Children then categorized on 
the basis of complications for referral (to NRC) or no-referral. ICT based tool 
is in place with H&FW to measure the impact of this programme.
154
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresANNEXURE 4-D
Supplementary Nutrition Programme details from States/UT
S.No. StatesMorning Snack (MS)/Hot 
Cooked Meal (HCM)Take-Home RationFortified food 
items used in SNP
1 A&N MS–Green gram whole, 
egg, boiled groundnut 
and milk. HCM–Khichdi, 
rajma rice, rice kheer
Quantity–20-120gms + 1 
egg per dayTHR given in the form 
of HCMFortified edible 
oil used in SNP 
for other items 
action has been 
initiated.
2 Andhra 
PradeshRice, Dal, Oil, Vegetables, 
Eggs Curry, Boiled 
Channa
Quantity–(3-6 y) Snacks 
-15g.
HCM–95g, eggs–4 per 
week6m-3y & SAM Children 
– Balamrutham 
(Weaning Food), Egg
PW&LM–one full meal 
consisting of dal, 
rice, oil, milk, eggs & 
veggies.Double Fortified 
Salt (DFS), 
fortified oil, 
rice (two pilot 
Districts- West 
godavari and 
krishn) supplied 
by Civil supplies 
dept.
3 Arunachal 
PradeshMS-biscuit/kheer/Instant 
Poha 2 days each & HCM–
Rice-50gm, Dal-15gm, 
oil-5 gmEnergy Food (Rice 
& Pulse base)/ 
Quantity-100gm, PM 
& LM-Instant poha & 
Kheer-150HCM–No, THR–
yes
4 Assam Khichdi, payas, suji halwa, 
Quantity- 80g6m -3 y- rice and 
peas; SAM–rice and 
mixed pulse-based 
micronutrient fortified 
energy dense food; 
P W&LM–Rice and 
mixed pulse-based 
micronutrient fortified 
energy dense food–110gHCM–No, THR–
yes
5 Bihar MS-milk powder-18 g, 
water-150ml & boiled egg
-1 pc & Germinated Chana 
+jaggery-60gm once in a 
week each & rice flake & 
Jaggery-60g m four days 
in a week,Given in the form 
of dry ration (food 
grain)- Rice -2500gm, 
Pulse-1250 gm, 
soyabadi-500gm or 
egg-8 pc/ month, SAM- 
Rice-3750gm, masoor-
1750gm, egg-12/month 
or soyabadi-875gm/
month, PW&LM- 
Rice-3500gm, pulse-
1500gm, egg
-7 or soyabadi-450g/
monthDFS pilot in 6 
Districts and plan 
to cover entire 
State in June 
2019.
Annexures
155
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
S.No. StatesMorning Snack (MS)/Hot 
Cooked Meal (HCM)Take-Home RationFortified food 
items used in SNP
HCM-Khichidi-Rice-60gm, 
Pulse-25gm, Vegt-20 gm, 
oil-5gm thrice in a week 
& rice pulao–Rice-60gm, 
chana-20gm, vegt-20gm, 
oil-5gm once in a week 
& Suji Halwa-Suji-60gm, 
G.nut-10 gm, sugar-30gm. 
oil-5gm once in a week 
& Ra shiya-Rice-60gm, 
Jaggery-30gm, G.nut-
10gm once in a week
6 Chandigarh Murmura, Halwa, Sweet 
Dalia, Kadi Rice, Aloo 
Nutri with gravy, Rice, 
Khichadi, Ghiya Chana 
dal, Aloo chana, Quantity- 
60-200gms6m-1 y in the form of 
weaning foods , 1-3 
years in the form of 
cooked food , murmura 
mixture, kadhi rice 
sweet dalia, ghia chana 
dal rice, halwa, aloo 
chana black, khichdi, 
moog dal and rice 
kadhi chawl, nutri aloo 
with gravy); SAM–HCM, 
PW&LM–HCMfortified food is 
supplied in AWC
7 Chhattisgarh MS- RTE, poha,
HCM–Roti, rice, mixed 
dal, sabzi, fortified oil, 
achar, papad, salad, 
jaggery, Quantity–approx. 
120g-150g as per menuTHR in powder form Fortified oil and 
salt
8 Dadar & 
Nagar HaveliBoiled Egg/ fruit, 
Vegetable khichdi, Sheera, 
S prouted moong and 
ground nut, Sukhdi and 
fruit, vegetable dalia, 
sprouted channa, lapsi; 
Quant ity- 100g–250 gTHR for 6 m to 3 
years–under process, 
currently HCM is 
provide d similar to 3 
-6 years, SAM–RUTF
, PW&LM–Dry Ration 
(Rice, wheat, Jaggery, 
Ground nut, Tuvar Dal, 
Raosted sing chana, oil, 
moong dal, moong)DFS and oil are 
used
156
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresS.No. StatesMorning Snack (MS)/Hot 
Cooked Meal (HCM)Take-Home RationFortified food 
items used in SNP
9 Daman & Diu Veg khichdi, sukhdi + 
boiled egg,, Boiled chana
+ banana, sujhdi+ boiled 
moong, roasted peanut 
chana+ lapsi, boiled 
chana+ boiled egg, boiled 
ground nut + banana), 
Quantity- 30-60g6m- 3y- Presently given 
Hot cooked meal, SAM–
not mentioned, PW
& LM- Dry ration given 
as THR (Wheat, Rice, 
ground nut chikki, tuvar 
dal, whole moong, desi 
chana, ragi, DFSDFS and fortified 
oil with Vit A & 
D used in the 
recipes
10 Delhi Boiled Bengal gram and 
green peas, sweet & 
namkeen dalia, khichadi, 
halwa, veg. pulao, kal 
a chana, dal with rice; 
Quantity–HCM–270g, M 
S–50g6m–3 y -Panjiri , 
Weaning Food, S 
AM–not mentioned, 
PW&LM- not 
mentionedno
11 Goa Monday -Mix Laddu, 
Tuesday Gram dal sweet, 
Wednesday–Sweet Idli, 
Thrusday- Green peas 
usal, Friday–Ground nut 
Chikki, Sat- Moong K 
hichdi; Quantity- 82g-126g6m- 3y -THR given in 
form of cereal grains 
and pulses with salt 
and jaggeryDFS and edible 
fortified oil are 
supplied to 
AWC, however, 
wheat and rice 
are procured 
under WBNP of 
Ministry.
12 Gujarat MS–(Sukhadi, Vaghreli 
Khichadi, Sheero, Mut hiya 
with GLVs, Sheero/Suk, 
Hadi sweet pudla)
HCM–(Thepla+ Tuver 
Dal, Thepla+dudhi chan 
a veg, Veg pula+Chana 
dal, Bhat and Veg Dushi 
Dhebra+Chana Veg 
Khichadi) Quantity- 50g- 
120g6m- 3y & SAM 
-Balshakti (weaning 
food) Wheat, Besan, 
Soyabean Fl our, Sugar, 
Oil), PW&LM–Matrush 
aktiFortified Oil and 
double fortified 
salt is
used in SNP.
Foritified wheat 
flour is in process
13 Haryana MS–Channa Murmura 
& Groundnut mixture + 
Panjiri.
HCM–Bharwa Parantha, 
Aloo poori, meethe 
Chawal, Pulao meetha 
Dalia, Gulgule; Quantity
- MS- 25-50g, HCM -110-
120g6m-18m–THR given 
in the form of Panjiri, 
1.5y-3 y- HCM is given 
similar to 3-6 yr, SAM- 
paushtik panjiri as THR 
(Weekly/ Fortnightly), 
200 g, PW&LM–HCM–
Bharwa
Parantha, Aloo poori, 
meethe Chawal, Pulao 
meetha Dalia, GulguleDFS, Fortified 
panjiri supplied 
in urban projects 
of the State, 
Fortified Wheat 
Flour supplied 
in 2 blocks of 
District Ambala 
(naraingarh, 
barara) on pilot 
basis through 
HAFED, from 
march. Wheat
Annexures
157
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
S.No. StatesMorning Snack (MS)/Hot 
Cooked Meal (HCM)Take-Home RationFortified food 
items used in SNP
Flour to be 
supplied in 
Distcrit Ambala 
and karnal, F. 
Edible oil to be 
supplied in all 
distrcits and 
panjiri plant by 
HAFED
14 Himachal 
PradeshMS- Nutrimix, Oat bisuits, 
ajwain biscuits, HCM–rice 
khichdi, meetha rice, 
sweet dalia, p anner curry, 
Quantity- not mentioned6m-3 y-(Foritifed 
Panjiri,+ F. Oat biscuit, 
Rice Pularo+ F. Oat 
biscui t, Sweet Dali + F. 
Ajwain biscuit), SAM–not 
mentioned, PW&LM–
Foritifed Panjiri,+ F. Oat 
biscuit, Rice Pulao+ 
F. Oat biscuit, Sweet 
Dali + F. Ajwain biscuit, 
Sprouted grams+ F. Oat 
biscuitFortified panjiti, 
Foritified biscuits, 
DFS, Fortified 
refined oil is used 
in SNP
15 J&K moong rice khichdi, chana 
pulao, matter pulao, 
moongi rice khichdi , 
chana pulao, matter 
pulao; Quantity -60-
210gms6m-3y–THR is given in 
the form of HCM, SAM- 
not mentioned, PW& 
LM – not mentionedfortified salt
16 Jharkhand Morning snacks–seasonal 
fruits, sweet dalia- 58 g, 
eggs, HCM khichdi–103 g6m- 3y -THR given 
in the form of panjiri 
(wheat flour, ragi flour, 
soya flour, Bengal gram, 
oil & sugar), SAM- 1.5 
times of normal child, 
PW&LM–THR given in 
the form upma (wheat 
semolina, soyabean, 
toor dal, sugar, oil, 
spice, vitamin & mineral 
mix) -150 gmDFS & fortified 
oil are used
17 Karnataka Recipe varies from 
District to District, Ragi 
Kheer, wheat upma, 
Moong dal, Gram dal 
kheer, sprouted grams, 
Chithranna, rice sambhar, 
Quantity- not mentioned6m-3 y -Nutrimix 
Powder (in flour fo 
rm- milk powder, ragi, 
wheat, moo ng dal, 
sugar) , Rice kheer mix, 
S AM–not mentioned, 
P&L–Not men tionedno
158
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresS.No. StatesMorning Snack (MS)/Hot 
Cooked Meal (HCM)Take-Home RationFortified food 
items used in SNP
18 Kerala MS–Ragi porridge, 
Nutritive laddoo, Ground 
nut chikki, Rice flake and 
jaggery, sprouted green 
gram. HCM–Broken wheat 
upma with ground nut, 
Rice flakes with bengal 
gram dal and jaggery, 
veg. Sambar, payasam 
with green gram, 
gooseberry chutney, rice 
dal khichdi with veg., 
Quantity- not mentioned6m- 3y–THR – 
Amrutham Nutrimix 
(weaning food), P&L–
Provided with raw food 
as THR (broken wheat/ 
sesame, jaggery, green 
gram, coconut oil, 
sandal etc.)fortified salt is 
used in all AWC, 
steps have been 
initiated for rice 
fortification on 
pilot basis in 
Kannur District, 
Amrithum 
nutrimix is 
fortified with 11 
micronutrients
19 Lakshad -
weepbiscuits, Horlicks milk, 
Quantity- not mentioned6m–3 y–in form of 
THR rice, green gram, 
Bengal gram, SAM- not 
mentioned, P&L–not 
mentionedHCM- yes, THR- 
not mentioned
20 Madhya 
Pradeshroti sabzi dal+ meethi 
lapsi, kheer, poori,aloo 
matter\ aloo chana + 
poshtic khichdi, roti sabzi 
dal+meethi lapsi, veg. 
Pulao, kadhi pakoda+ 
namkeen dalia, roti sabzi 
dal+upma, roti sabzi dal\ 
chawal sambar + meethi 
lapsi, Quantity–57g to 
155g6m–3 y- halwa premix 
bal ahar pre mix , 
khichdi, atta besan 
ladoo & kehu soya barfi 
, SAM–not mentio ned, 
P&L–not mentionedYes
21 Maharashtra Chiwda, Murmura, laddu, 
shira, chakli, lapsi, usal 
khichdi, Quantity- 150-
160gms6m-3y- in form of raw 
grains & groceries 
supplied through State 
consumer federation 
from 1st May, SAM–not 
mentioned, P&L–In 
form of raw materials 
(wheat, dal, spices 
F. soyabean oil, DFS, 
Chawal, mataki)Micronutrient 
fortified THR 
has been 
discontinued, 
only RAW THR is 
given
22 Manipur morning snacks sangom 
kheer, HCM khichdi 
(micronutrient pulse 
& rice, oil, groundnut, 
turme rice powder, salt), 
Quantity- 10gm morning 
snacks per child per day 
& 40gms per child per 
day6m -3y–Raw material, 
RTE lentil, mustard oil, 
groundnut, turmeric 
powder, salt, rice SAM- 
same as 6m- 3y, P&L 
-same as 6m-3yNo info.
Annexures
159
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
S.No. StatesMorning Snack (MS)/Hot 
Cooked Meal (HCM)Take-Home RationFortified food 
items used in SNP
23 Meghalaya Ms- Milk, HCM–Fortified 
suji, Fortified Cheera, 
kitchdi, dried peas/bengal 
gram, Quantity- 75-8 0g6m-3y–Ready to eat 
fortified food items 
given–Fortified atta, 
milk powder, RTE kheer, 
SAM–not mentioned, 
P&L–Ready to eat for 
tified food items given–
RTE kheer, RTE khichdi, 
f. Suji, F, cheeraFortified atta , 
suji, cheera and 
fortified edible 
oil, DFS given
24 Mizoram high protein biscuit, 
roasted ground nut, fresh 
fruits HCM–Khitchdi, 
parantha and chann, high 
protein soya noodles, 
Quantity-58-137g6m–3y-Energy dense 
fortified food, SAM- not 
mentioned, P&L–not 
mentionedDFS and fortified 
oil distributed in 
SNP
25 Nagaland MS-biscuit & cornflake-
100gm per day, HCM- 
Rich rice food-50gm, 
healthy chow-40gm per 
dayTHR-Surho kheer mix 
& Balbhog kheer 75gm 
each per day including 
SAM, PM, LM-THR-
surho kheermix & 
Balbhog kheer- 100gm 
& 80gm per dayyes
26 Orissa MS-Chuda Badam 
Laddu-35 gm, HCM-Rice 
& egg curry, Rice-80gm, 
Egg-1 pc, Oil-3ml, potato-
20gm, onion-10gmTHR-Chhatua-88gm, 
Maize Halwa- 60gm, 
egg-3pc weekly, 
PM,LM- Chhatua-
196gmBadam 
Laddu-24.4 gm & 
egg-3pc weekly, SAM-
THR- Chhatua-4.9kg, 
Baddam Laddu-61 0gmnot mentioned
27 Puducherry Rice khichdi, ragi putu, 
boiled egg, Quantity–1 
20g6m–3 y -Micronutrient 
Fortified Food 
supplements, SAM- 
not mentioned, P&L–
Micronutrient Fortified 
Food supplementsNot mentioned
28 Punjab (3-6y- Halwa+ Kheer, 
Sweet Dalia + Milk, 
Halwa+ Panjiri), PW&LM–
Sweet Dalia, Kheer, 
Panjiri), Quantity- 100-
140g6m–3 y–Sweet Dalia, 
Kheer, Panjiri given as 
HCM, SAM 3-6 years- 
Sweet Dalia, Kheer, 
Panjiri, Halwa, 120-203g 
P&L–Sweet Dalia, Kheer, 
Panjiri given as HCMcurrently fortified 
panjiri and 
Ghee are used, 
fortification of 
other food items 
will be finalized 
after decision 
of Hon’ble High 
Court.
160
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresS.No. StatesMorning Snack (MS)/Hot 
Cooked Meal (HCM)Take-Home RationFortified food 
items used in SNP
29 Rajasthan Rice Puffed and roasted 
Channa with jaggery, 
Halwa, HCM Khichdi, 
Dalia, Quantity- 55gm 
morn. Snacks per day per 
beneficiaries, 80gm HCM 
per day per beneficiary6m–3 y–Yes in the 
form of baby mix 
(whole wheat, bengal 
gram, soyabean, sugar, 
edible oil, SAM- not 
mentioned, P&L–in 
the form of baby mix 
(whole wheat, bengal 
gram, soyabean, sugar, 
edible oilDFS & BSF oils 
are used
30 Sikkim HCM as morning snacks, 
HCM as khichdi in day 
time, HCM khichdi @ 
150gm per day per child 
kheer @150 gms every 
Thursday6m-3y THR given 
in form of poshtik 
ahaar (wheat, maize, 
soyabean, bengal 
gram, sugar & multi 
vitamin s), SAM- not 
mentioned, P&L–not 
mentionedfood is fortified 
with multi-
vitamins by FS 
SAI guidelines
31 Tamil Nadu Tomato rice+ boiled egg, 
Mixed rice with
Black Bengal/ Green 
Gram, Veg. Pulav+ boiled 
egg, lemon rice+ boiled 
egg, Dal Rice with boiled 
potato, mixed rice, 
Quantity- 20-80g6m-3y -Complementary 
food- Sathumavu 
(Amylase rich Weanin 
g Food), SAM–
Complementary food- 
Sathumavu (Amylase 
rich Weaning Food) 
supplied weekly, P&L–
Complementary food- 
Sathumavu (Amylase 
rich Weaning Food)Complementary 
weaning food 
fortified as per 
ICDS guideline
32 Telangana Snack Food (MUKURU) 
Ready to eat food in 
sa vory form at AWC 
+HCM Mini HCM) Rice, 
dal, Vegetable + Egg; 
Quantity- 25g/ day (MS) 
+ 14 0g/day(HCM)+ 4 
eggs per week6m–3 y–Balamrutham 
-(Ready to eat food in 
powder form) and Egg 
s, SAM- same as 6m 
-3y, P&L One full meal 
consists of Rice, Dal, 
Oil, VegetablesNo
33 Tripura Monday–Khichuri+gram 
Dal with seasonal veg 
etables & Soyabean + 
Salty Sujir Haloa, 
Tues day- Chola/Bengal 
Gram with Muri, 
Wednesday 1 Boiled Egg, 
Thrusday–Chirar Polao, 
Friday Chola/Bengal 
Gram with Muri, Saturday 
-1 (One) Boiled Egg. 
Quantity- 30-90 g6m-3 y–in form of 
Raw rice, masoor dal, 
raw egg, soyabean, 
semolina, bengal gram 
and rice flakes, SAM–
(rice , dal, soyabean, 
semolina, bengal gram, 
rice flakes,) + 10 eggs, 
P&L–rice, dal, soyabean, 
semolina, bengal gram, 
rice flakes,) + 10 eggsDFS, F. Oil is 
used
Annexures
161
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
S.No. StatesMorning Snack (MS)/Hot 
Cooked Meal (HCM)Take-Home RationFortified food 
items used in SNP
34 Uttar 
PradeshRTE as morning 
snacks energy dense 
ladoo premix, Energy 
dense meetha dalia, 
micronutrient fortified 
enegy dense namkeen 
dalia, HCM roti, dal, veg., 
tahri, milk, soyabean, 
Quantity- morning snacks 
400-450gm per month6m–3 y–yes in form 
of RTE Micronutrient 
Fortified energy dense 
weaning food, (wheat, 
sugar, bengal gram, 
groundnut, soyabean, 
veg. oil) meetha dalia, 
fortifed namkeen dalia 
in the form of RTE 
weaning dense foods, 
energy dense meetha 
dalia, fortified namkeen 
dalia, SAM–Not 
mentioned, P&L-energy 
dense ladoo premix, 
Energy dense meetha 
dalia, micronutrient 
fortified enegy dense 
namkeen daliawith minerals & 
vita mins
35 Uttrakhand MS- Bhuna Chan, Ata & 
Suji Halwa, Buni Moon 
g phali, poha, boiled 
channa, HCM– Dal+Rice, 
Nutrila rice, namkeen 
parantha, meetha dalia, 
namkeen dalia, khichdi; 
Quantity- MS- 30g, HC 
M- 110g6m–3 y–Raw 
ingredients (Broken 
wheat, dal, peanuts, 
seasonal fruit), SAM–
Dry ration, P&L–Raw 
ingredients (Broken 
wheat, dal, peanuts, 
seasonal fruit)DFS
36 West Bengal MS–Poushtik ladoo(@ 
48g), Boiled egg, banana; 
HCM (@ 75-100g)-Rice 
+egg curry with potato, 
Rice + dal+ veg with soya 
nuggets, Veg. Khichdi + 
soya nuggetsHCM provided in place 
THRnot used
162
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresANNEXURE 4-E
Status of Malnourished Children reported by the States/UTs
S.No. State/UTsNo. of Malnourished 
Children
1 Andhra Pradesh 55607
2 Bihar 389174
3 Chhattisgarh 159833
4 Goa 60
5 Gujarat 93672
6 Haryana 4342
7 Himachal Pradesh 2568
8 Jammu & Kashmir 6198
9 Ladakh 20
10 Jharkhand 13283
11 Karnataka 10915
12 Kerala 5587
13 Madhya Pradesh 104868
14 Maharashtra 81242
15 Odisha 22641
16 Punjab 600
17 Rajastham 8645
18 Tamil Nadu 4534
19 Telangana 35700
20 UttarPradesh 397000
21 Uttarakhand 1800
22 West Bengal 9996
23 Delhi 250
24 Puducherry 0
25 Andaman & Nicobar 50
26 Chandigarh 336
27 Dadar & Nagar Haveli & daman & Diu 1245
28 Lakshadweep 0
29 Arunachal Pradesh 0
30 Assam 11298
31 Manipur 17
32 Meghalaya 615
33 Mizoram 271
34 Nagaland 275
35 Sikkim 30
36 Tripura 464
Total 1423136
Annexures
163
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
ANNEXURE 5: CONCORDANCE CHECK BETWEEN STATE 
TEMPLATE INDICATORS AND MPR/HMIS DATA
Concordance check between state template and MPR data was conducted on the WCD 
programme activity indicators. After the verification of data was conducted for the States 
and UTs where the State data was greater than or less than to MPR data by 10%, the 
final concordance between the indicators are as follow:
Indicator Data received 
from States Data from 
MPRState to 
MPR data
THR received by children aged 6-36 months for 
March 202036695223 36097901 101.7%
THR received by pregnant women and 
lactating women for March 202011533093 11663940 98.8%
Concordance check between state template and HMIS data was conducted on the health 
programme activity indicators. After the verification of data was conducted for the States 
and UTs where the State data was greater than or less than to MPR data by 10%, the 
final concordance between the indicators are as follow:
Indicator Data received 
from States Data from 
HMISState to 
HMIS data
Total no. of pregnant women who registered 
for ANC in first trimester1564077 1573680 99.4%
Total No. of pregnant women who received 4 
or more ANC check-ups1686736 1698898 99.3%
Total No. of pregnant women given TT2/ 
Boosters2187310 1848705 118.3%
Total No. of pregnant women given 1 
Albendazole tablet after 1st trimester993136 989949 100.3%
Total No. of pregnant women given 180 IFA 
tablets during ANC1957920 1997765 97%
Total No. of lactating women given 180 IFA 
tablets1368423 984072 139.1%
Total No. of children 6-59 months who were 
provided at least 8-10 doses of IFA syrup per 
month13273124 14288047 93%
Percentage of newborn breastfed within one 
hour of birth (Early Initiation of Breastfeeding)81.98 85.37 96%
164
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresANNEXURE 6: TOP AND BOTTOM PERFORMING STATES/UTS 
BASED ON INDICATORS USED IN RUBRIC
The performance of States/UTs is based on a rubric which comprises of 4 themes, which 
consists of number of indicators (Annexure 2). The top and bottom performing States 
are as follows:
ANNEXURE 6-A: GOVERNANCE & INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISM
a. Fund utilization by States/UTs
Performance of top 5 and bottom 5 States/UTs are as follows:
Top 5 performing States/UTs Bottom 5 performing States/UTs
State/ UT Fund Utilized State/UT Fund Utilized
Nagaland 87% Punjab 22%
Meghalaya 78% Puducherry 22%
Sikkim 71% Tripura 16%
Mizoram 67% Arunachal Pradesh 9%
Lakshadweep 65% Odisha 8%
b. Constitution of Committees and Resource Groups
Apart from the following States/UTs, all the remaining States/UTs have constituted 
committees and resource groups in 100% districts. The bottom performing States/UTs 
are:
Constitution of DRGs Constitution of BRGsConstitution of CAP 
committees
State/UT% districts 
with DRGsState/UT% districts 
with BRGsState/UT% districts 
with CAP
Delhi 82% Tripura 97% Chhattisgarh 96%
Puducherry 50% Meghalaya 89% Odisha 93%
Assam 0% Assam 1% Puducherry 50%
Ladakh 0% Ladakh 0% Assam 18%
— — — — Goa 0%
Annexures
165
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
ANNEXURE 6-B: STRATEGY AND PLANNING
a. % of districts that developed and submitted CAP for FY 2020-21
States/UTs where 100% districts that developed and submitted CAP for FY 2020-21 are 
as follows:
Category of 
StateState with 100% districts that developed and submitted CAP 
for FY 2020-21Total
Large States Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh13
Small States Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, 
Tripura6
Union 
TerritoriesChandigarh, Dadar & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, Jammu 
& Kashmir, Ladakh, Lakshadweep5
The 5 States/UTs with the least number of districts that developed and submitted CAP 
for FY 2020-21 are as follows:
State/UT % districts that developed and 
submitted CAP for FY 2020-21
Puducherry 50%
Assam 18%
Uttarakhand 0%
Goa 0%
Andaman & Nicobar Island 0%
166
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresANNEXURE 6-C: INPUTS FOR SERVICE DELIVERY AND CAPACITY- 
DEPARTMENT OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
a. Human Resources
States/UTs that filled 100% HR positions are as follows:
Category of 
State100% Joint Coordinator positions filled Total
Large StatesAndhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, 
Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttarakhand12
Small States Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim 4
Union TerritoriesChandigarh, Dadar & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, Delhi, 
Jammu & Kashmir4
Category of 
State100% Consultant positions filled Total
Large StatesAssam, Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, Telangana7
Small States Mizoram 1
Union TerritoriesAndaman & Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman & Diu3
Category of 
State100% Project Associate positions filled Total
Large StatesAndhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Telangana, Uttarakhand10
Small States Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim 4
Union TerritoriesAndaman & Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman & Diu, Lakshadweep4
The following States/UTs had not filled any positions for Joint Coordinator, Consultant, 
and Project Associate:
Joint Coordinator Consultant Project Associate
Punjab Punjab Punjab
Goa Goa Goa
Tripura Tripura Tripura
Puducherry Puducherry Puducherry
Haryana Odisha Odisha
Chhattisgarh Uttar Pradesh Uttar Pradesh
Andaman & Nicobar Island Jammu & Kashmir Jammu & Kashmir 
Arunachal Pradesh Sikkim Arunachal Pradesh
Lakshadweep - Delhi
Annexures
167
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
a. Supplies
States/UTs that distributed 100% of supplies are as follows:
Category of 
State100% mobile phones distributed to districts Total
Large StatesAndhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, 
Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand8
Small States Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura 4
Union 
TerritoriesAndaman & Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar Haveli 
and Daman & Diu, Delhi, Ladakh5
Category of 
State100% weighing scale (adult) distributed Total
Large StatesAndhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttarakhand10
Small States Goa, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland 4
Union 
TerritoriesAndaman & Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman & Diu, Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, 
Lakshadweep, Puducherry8
Category of 
State100% weighing scale (infant) distributed Total
Large StatesAndhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, 
Uttarakhand11
Small States Goa, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland 4
Union 
TerritoriesAndaman & Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman & Diu, Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, 
Lakshadweep, Puducherry8
Category of 
State100% infantometer distributed Total
Large StatesAndhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Tamil 
Nadu, Telangana, Uttarakhand13
Small States Goa, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland 4
Union 
TerritoriesAndaman & Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman & Diu, Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, 
Lakshadweep, Puducherry8
Category of 
State100% stadiometer distributed Total
Large StatesAndhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, 
Telangana, Uttarakhand12
Small States Goa, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland 4
Union 
TerritoriesAndaman & Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman & Diu, Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, 
Lakshadweep, Puducherry8
168
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresThe least performing States/UTs on distribution of supplies are as follows:
Mobile PhonesWeigh-scale 
(Adult)Weigh-scale 
(Infant)Infantometer Stadiometer
Odisha Odisha Odisha Odisha Odisha
Arunachal 
PradeshArunachal 
PradeshArunachal 
PradeshArunachal 
PradeshArunachal 
Pradesh
Kerala Manipur Manipur Manipur Manipur
Himachal 
PradeshHaryana Haryana Uttar Pradesh Uttar Pradesh
Punjab Sikkim Sikkim Chhattisgarh Sikkim
— Rajasthan — — —
Training and Capacity Building
States/UTs that have trained 100% staff on e-ILA and dashboard/mobile phones are as 
follows:
Category of 
State100% LS trained on e-ILA Total
Large StatesAndhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, 
Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh7
Small States Meghalaya, Sikkim, Tripura 3
Union 
TerritoriesAndaman & Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman & Diu, Jammu & Kahsmir4
Category of 
State100% AWW trained on e-ILA Total
Large States Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh 5
Small States Sikkim 1
Union 
TerritoriesAndaman & Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman & Diu, Jammu & Kashmir 4
Category of 
State100% CDPOs trained on Dashboard/Mobile Total
Large States Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Kerala, Tamil Nadu 5
Small States Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura 3
Union 
TerritoriesAndaman & Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman & Diu, Delhi, Lakshadweep5
Category of 
State100% LS trained on Dashboard/Mobile Total
Large StatesAndhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, 
Uttarakhand6
Small States Meghalaya, Nagaland, Sikkim 3
Union 
TerritoriesAndaman & Nicobar Island, Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman & Diu, Delhi4
Annexures
169
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
States/UTs that had 0% staff trained on e-ILA and dashboard/mobile phones are as 
follows:
Category of 
State0% LS trained on e-ILA Total
Large StatesAssam, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Punjab, Telangana, 
Uttarakhand7
Small States Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Mizoram, Nagaland 3
Union 
TerritoriesDelhi, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, Puducherry 4
Category of 
State0% AWW trained on e-ILA Total
Large StatesAssam, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Punjab, Telangana, 
Uttarakhand7
Small States Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland 4
Union 
TerritoriesDelhi, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, Puducherry 4
Category of 
State0% CDPOs trained on dashboard/mobile phones Total
Large States Assam, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Uttarakhand 5
Small States Goa, Mizoram 2
Union 
TerritoriesJammu & Kahsmir, Ladakh 2
Category of 
State0% LS trained on dashboard/mobile phones Total
Large States Assam, Haryana, Karnataka, Punjab 4
Small States Goa 1
Union 
TerritoriesJammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, Puducherry 3
170
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresANNEXURE 6-D: SERVICE DELIVERY ESSENTIALS- DEPARTMENT 
OF HEALTH
a. Infrastructure
Out of sanctioned health facilities, 100% facilities are functional in the following States/
UTs:
Category of 
State100% sub-centres functional Total
Large StatesAndhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Tamil 
Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand13
Small States Goa, Sikkim 2
Union 
TerritoriesAndaman & Nicobar Island, Dadar & Nagar Haveli and Daman 
& Diu, Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, Puducherry6
Category of 
State100% CHCs functional Total
Large StatesAndhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand14
Small States Goa, Manipur, Meghalaya, Sikkim 4
Union 
TerritoriesAndaman & Nicobar Island, Chandigarh Dadar & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman & Diu, Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, 
Lakshadweep, Puducherry8
Category of 
State100% HWCs functional Total
Large States Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Punjab 3
Small States Goa, Nagaland 2
Union 
TerritoriesChandigarh, Dadar & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, 
Lakshadweep3
Out of sanctioned health facilities, following States/UTS had lowest number of functional 
health facilities:
Sub-centres functional CHCs functional HWCs functional
State % sub-centre State % CHCs State % HWCs
Punjab 77% Tripura 88% Maharashtra 36%
Nagaland 76% Assam 82% Ladakh 33%
Lakshadweep 71% Punjab 82% Puducherry 33%
Arunachal 
Pradesh63% Nagaland 64% Bihar 30%
Bihar 60% Bihar 43% Haryana 26%
Annexures
171
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Human Resource
Performance of top 5 and bottom 5 States/UTs on ANM positions filled are as follows:
Top 5 performing States/UTs Bottom 5 performing States/UTs
State/ UT ANM position filled State/UT ANM position filled
Arunachal Pradesh 100% Karnataka 78%
Nagaland 100% Himachal Pradesh 71%
Lakshadweep 100% Uttar Pradesh 61%
Odisha 100% Tripura 56%
Assam 99% Bihar 52%
172
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresANNEXURE 6-E: PROGRAMME ACTIVITIES AND INTERVENTION 
COVERAGE-DEPARTMENT OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
a. Take Home Ration
States/UTs that distributed THR to 100% beneficiaries registered at AWCs are as follows:
Category of 
StateTHR distributed to 100% pregnant women Total
Large StatesGujarat, Jharkhand, Kerala, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan, 
Tamil Nadu7
Small States Meghalaya, Mizoram, Tripura 3
Union 
TerritoriesAndaman & Nicobar Island, Dadar & Nagar Haveli and Daman 
& Diu, Delhi, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, Puducherry6
Category of 
StateTHR distributed to 100% lactating women Total
Large States Jharkhand, Kerala, Maharashtra, Odisha, Tamil Nadu 5
Small States Goa, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Tripura 4
Union 
TerritoriesAndaman & Nicobar Island, Delhi, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, 
Puducherry5
Category of 
StateTHR distributed to 100% children (6-36 months) Total
Large StatesJharkhand, Kerala, Maharashtra, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Uttar 
Pradesh6
Small States Meghalaya, Mizoram, Tripura 3
UTsAndaman & Nicobar Island, Dadar & Nagar Haveli and Daman 
& Diu, Delhi, Ladakh, Lakshadweep5
States/UTs with least distribution of THR are as follows:
Pregnant women Lactating women Children (6-36 months)
State % covered State % covered State % covered
Karnataka 80% Punjab 76% Sikkim 77%
Punjab 78% Haryana 63% Punjab 65%
Bihar 65% Bihar 62% Haryana 59%
Haryana 63% Jammu & 
Kashmir51% Jammu & 
Kashmir54%
Jammu & 
Kashmir49% Puducherry 49% Bihar 52%
Annexures
173
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
b. Children (0-5 years) weighed:
Top and bottom performing States/UTs on % of children (0-5 years) registered under 
AWC weighed at AWC are as follows:
Top performing States/UTs Bottom performing States/UTs
State/ UT Children weighed State/UT Children weighed
Karnataka 100% Nagaland 44%
Lakshadweep 100% Telangana 37%
Maharashtra 100% Kerala 18%
Odisha 100% Bihar 16%
Sikkim 100% Ladakh 15%
Tamil Nadu 100% Arunachal Pradesh 4%
174
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresANNEXURE 6-F: PROGRAMME ACTIVITIES AND INTERVENTION 
COVERAGE- DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
a. Programme Activities:
Top 5 and bottom 5 performing States/UTs on the 14 indicators that were used in rubric 
are as follows:
Top States/UTs Bottom States/UTs Top States/UTs Bottom States/UTs
% of newborn breastfed within one hour of 
birth% of children (12-23 mo) fully immunized
Gujarat 100% Nagaland 67% Haryana 100% Lakshadweep 5%
Lakshadweep 100% Sikkim 50% Uttar Pradesh 96% Delhi 4%
Odisha 96% Rajasthan 7%D &N Haveli 
Daman & Diu95% Kerala 3%
Assam 96% Puducherry 4% Telangana 94%Arunachal 
Pradesh2%
Andhra 
Pradesh96% Ladakh 0%Andaman & 
Nicobar93% Nagaland 1%
% of children (6-59 mo) provided at least 
8-10 doses of IFA syrup per month% of pregnant women who registered for 
ANC in first trimester
Himachal 
Pradesh100% Manipur 0% Tamil Nadu 95% Ladakh 59%
Sikkim 100% Tripura 0%D &N Haveli 
Daman & Diu95% Goa 52%
Puducherry 98%Arunachal 
Pradesh0% Chhattisgarh 93%Arunachal 
Pradesh41%
Telangana 65% Goa 0% Assam 91% Meghalaya 39%
Haryana 58% Nagaland 0% Odisha 90% Puducherry 36%
Andaman & 
Nicobar44% Rajasthan 0% Maharashtra 88% Nagaland 31%
D &N Haveli 
Daman & Diu43% Lakshadweep 0% Gujarat 96% Punjab 7%
Maharashtra 39% Delhi 0% Kerala 85% Tripura 7%
% of pregnant women who received 4 or 
more ANCs% of pregnant women who were given 180 
IFA Tablets
Chhattisgarh 100% Ladakh 62% Chhattisgarh 100%Jammu & 
Kashmir65%
Kerala 100% Manipur 60% Kerala 100%Andaman & 
Nicobar64%
Chandigarh 100% Rajasthan 58% Chandigarh 100% Manipur 50%
Maharashtra 97% Meghalaya 46% Karnataka 100% Rajasthan 46%
Annexures
175
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
Top States/UTs Bottom States/UTs Top States/UTs Bottom States/UTs
D &N Haveli 
Daman & Diu95%Arunachal 
Pradesh25% Uttar Pradesh 100% Meghalaya 44%
Karnataka 93% Nagaland 19% Telangana 100% Nagaland 29%
Lakshadweep 90% Tripura 6% Maharashtra 100% Punjab 6%
Andhra 
Pradesh90% Punjab 6% Gujarat 99% Tripura 3%
% of lactating women who were given 180 
IFA Tablets% of 5-9 years children who were given 
weekly IFA tablets
Assam 100% Puducherry 12%Himachal 
Pradesh100%Jammu & 
Kashmir3%
Chandigarh 100% Meghalaya 8% Gujarat 100% Ladakh 2%
Goa 100% Gujarat 6% Puducherry 100% Chattisgarh 0%
Jharkhand 100% Tamil Nadu 3% Uttarakhand 100%Arunachal 
Pradesh0%
Jammu & 
Kashmir100% Punjab 2% Tripura 97% Haryana 0%
Rajasthan 100% Kerala 2% Chandigarh 94% Nagaland 0%
Sikkim 100% Tripura 1%Madhya 
Pradesh75% Sikkim 0%
% of pregnant women given TT2/Boosters% of pregnant women given 1 Albendazole 
tablet after first trimester
Andhra 
Pradesh100% Delhi 41% Puducherry 93% Ladakh 10%
Chhattisgarh 100% Nagaland 40% Gujarat 86% Manipur 6%
Jharkhand 100% Puducherry 28%D & N Haveli 
Daman & Diu81% Kerala 5%
Odisha 100% Punjab 7% Chgattisgarh 80% Punjab 3%
Tamil Nadu 99% Tripura 7% Odisha 76% Tripura 0%
% of children (0-59 mo) diarrhoea cases 
reported treated with ORS & Zinc% of home visits to household with 
pregnant mother to counsel on appropriate 
measures
Gujarat 100%Andhra 
Pradesh75% Puducherry 100% Jharkhand 80%
Chhattisgarh 100% Ladakh 69%Jammu & 
Kashmir98%Andaman & 
Nicobar80%
Odisha 100%D & N Haveli 
& Daman & 
Diu57% Uttarakhand 98% Maharashtra 75%
Karnataka 100% Jharkhand 35% Chhattisgarh 97% Ladakh 71%
Madhya 
Pradesh100%Jammu & 
Kashmir29% Haryana 96% Karnataka 67%
176
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
AnnexuresTop States/UTs Bottom States/UTs Top States/UTs Bottom States/UTs
Himachal 
Pradesh100% Uttarakhand 28%D & N Haveli 
& Daman & 
Diu90% Assam 55%
Maharashtra 100% Manipur 26% Tripura 90%Himachal 
Pradesh51%
Haryana 100%Andaman & 
Nicobar23% Telangana 88%Andhra 
Pradesh47%
Assam 100% Kerala 22% Punjab 86% Delhi 34%
Telangana 100% Meghalaya Sikkim 84%Arunachal 
Pradesh18%
Goa 100% Sikkim Odisha 82%Madhya 
Pradesh0%
Uttar Pradesh 100% Puducherry Tamil Nadu 81% - -
Annexures
177
Poshan Abhiyaan Monitoring
PRESERVING PROGRESS ON NUTRITION IN INDIA: 
POSHAN ABHIYAAN IN PANDEMIC TIMES
Designed b y
 JULY 21POSHAN ABHIYAANPRESERVING PROGRESS ON 
NUTRITION IN INDIA:
IN PANDEMIC TIMES