
---
ACRONYMS


AAM Ayushman Arogya Mandir
ABDM Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission
AB-PMJAY Ayushman Bharat - Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana
ACSM Advocacy, Communication, and Social Mobilization
AMB Anemia Mukt Bharat
ANC Anti Natal Checkup
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowa Rigpa and Homoeopathy
BCG Bacille Calmette-Guerin vaccine
CBO Community-based Organization
CHO Community Health Officer
CHC Community Health Centre
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility
DM Diabetes mellitus
ECD Early Childhood Development
FY Fiscal Year
GoI Government of India
HBNC Home Based Neonatal Care
HBYC Home Based Young Child Care
HSS Health Systems Strengthening
IC Infection Control
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research
ICT Information and Communication Technologies
ICTC Integrated Counseling and Testing Center
IMI Intensified Mission Indradhanush
JAS Jan Arogya Samiti
JMM Joint Monitoring Mission
KPI Key Performance Indicator
MAS Mahila Arogya Samiti
MCH Maternal and Child Health
MCHN Day Maternal, Child Health Nutrition Day 7
---
MDG Millennium Development Goal
MO Medical Officer
MoHFW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
MPHW Multipurpose Health Worker
MWCD Ministry of Women & Child Development
NACO National AIDS Control Organization
NACP National AIDS Control Program
NCD Non communicable Disease
NGO Non-governmental Organization
NHA National Health Authority
NHM National Health Mission
NIKSHAY Web-enabled electronic TB case notification/monitoring system
NP-NCD National Programme for Prevention and Control of NCD
NRHM National Rural Health Mission
NSP National Strategic Plan
NSS National Sample Survey
NTCP National Tobacco Control Programme
NTEP National Tuberculosis Elimination Program
NTSU National Technical Support Unit
NUHM National Urban Health Mission
NVHCP National Viral Hepatitis Control Program
PHC Primary Health Center
PHI Peripheral Health Institution
PIP Project Implementation Plan
PM-JAY Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojna
PRI Panchayati Raj Institution
PSM Procurement and Supply Management
QA Quality Assurance
RBSK Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram
RCH Reproductive and Child Health
SHWP School Health and Wellness Programme
UHC Universal Health Coverage
UIP Universal Immunization Programme
UN United Nations 8
---
UNAIDS Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund
USAID United States Agency for International Development
WCO World Health Organization Country Office
WHO World Health Organization
WHP World Health Partners



9
---
Ayushman Bharat – Ayushman Arogya Mandir


About AB-AAM

The Ayushman Bharat – Ayushman Arogya Mandirs (AB-AAMs) were launched under the
Ayushman Bharat Programme in a bid to move away from selective health care to a more
comprehensive range of services spanning preventive, promotive, curative, rehabilitative and
palliative care for all ages. The National Health Policy of 2017 envisioned these centres as the
foundation of India’s health system.
Expanded range of services


These centres deliver a range of comprehensive health care services like maternal and child
health, services to address communicable and non-communicable diseases and services
for elderly and palliative care. AB- AAMs provide free essential medicines and diagnostic
services, teleconsultation, and health promotion including wellness activities like Yoga.
The expansion of services has been planned in incremental manner. As a first step,
Screening, Prevention, Control and Management of Non-communicable Diseases and
Chronic Communicable diseases like Tuberculosis and Leprosy has been introduced at
AAMs.
1. Care in pregnancy and childbirth.
2. Neonatal and infant health care services
3. Childhood and adolescent health care services.
4. Family planning, Contraceptive services and Other Reproductive Health Care services
5. Management of Communicable diseases: National Health Programs
6. Management of Common Communicable Diseases and General Out-patient care for
acute simple illnesses and minor ailments
7. Screening, Prevention, Control and Management of Non-Communicable diseases
and chronic communicable disease like TB and Leprosy
8. Basic Oral health care
9. Care for Common Ophthalmic and ENT problems
10.Elderly and Palliative health care services
11.Emergency Medical Services
12.Screening and Basic management of Mental health ailment
10
---
Key Components

The delivery of CPHC through AAMs involve is complex task as it requires a paradigm shift at
all levels of health systems. The operationalization of AAMs requires several inputs.
Expended
Contlnuum of Care Servlce Dellvery
Tele-health Referral
Expanding HRMultlskillIng
Medlclnes & Expandlng
Dlagnostlcs
Partnershlps
for Knowledge
Implementatlon
CPHC throughHWC
Communlty
Moblllsatlon
and Health
Financing/ Provider Promotlon
Payment Reforme
Robust IT System
Source: https://aam.mohfw.gov.in/



11
---
MATERNAL

HEALTH



12
---
1
1

MCHN Day (Maternal, Child Health & Nutrition Day)


MCHN day is to be organized in every village once a month at the Anganwadi Centre (It can
also be held more than once if the local context warrants eg. high population villages). It may
also be organized in urban areas. The session will be conducted for a minimum of four hours
of this at least one hour should be devoted to group counselling sessions. Frontline service
providers multi-purpose worker female (MPW-F/ANM), Accredited Social Health Activist
(ASHA), Anganwadi Worker (AWW) and Anganwadi Helper (AWH) will be present during the
entire session. MPW (M), where available will also attend MCHN Day. He should be
responsible for Counselling for Communicable diseases, NCDs including mental health
issues. Community-level representatives, members of Mothers’ Groups and Self-Help
Groups (SHGs), are to participate in the event.
Availability of all essential equipment such as weighing scale-adult & child, B.P. Instrument,
examination table with stool, bed screen/curtains, Haemoglobin metres, kits for urine
examination, fetoscope, measuring tape, Vaccine carrier with ice packs, Red/Black poly
begs, etc.
Ensure sufficient availability of all supplies, such as vaccines, IFA tablets, Vitamin A,
condoms, Centchroman (Chhaya), Emergency Contraceptives Pills (ECP), ORS, Zinc,
Cotrimoxazole, Paracetamol, and AD syringes.



Conducting the MCHN Day


• ANM, AWW and ASHA will ensure that the Anganwadi Centre/MCHN site is opened
at the stipulated time.
• Health area, Nutrition corner, ECD corner and group counselling area should be
arranged with the requisite drugs, logistics, supplies, materials and IEC materials. The
common due list for services should be available at the site.
• ASHA should check that the identified beneficiaries are attending the MCHN day.



13
---
• Services are delivered and documented by ANM and Anganwadi worker. Services
listed in the MCP card are recorded on the card. Any additional services given should
also be recorded.
• Lady supervisors, Lady Health visitors, ASHA facilitators and CHO are to provide
supportive supervision and monitor MCHN day using the monitoring checklist.
Post MCHN Day


• ANM, Anganwadi worker and ASHA should make a tally of beneficiaries who attended
MCHN day and the absentees. Households for follow up services should be listed.
List of High Risk Pregnancies (HRPs), SAM children and any other beneficiaries
requiring referral should be prepared and followed up. Any referral made should be
documented by the three service providers.
• The report of services delivered during MCHN day is submitted by ANM, and
Anganwadi worker through their regular channels to Block/PHC Medical Officer
(BMO) and CDPO respectively.
• ASHA and AWW conduct follow-up visits to beneficiary homes such as for newborn
care, to promote infant and young child feeding, counsel pregnant women etc. They
also contact absentee beneficiaries to motivate them to attend the next MCHN day.
• District and Blocks/PHCs are to discuss on MCHN day held during the month in their
monthly meetings. Findings from monitoring checklist are to be presented and
discussed for necessary action.
Availability of Service Package on MCHN day


Services Activities
Antenatal • All pregnant women are to be registered
care • Registered pregnant women to be given ANC services.
• Dropout pregnant women eligible for ANC are to be tracked and given
services.
Immunization • All PW are to be given Td as per schedule
• All eligible children are to be given vaccines as per National
Immunization Schedule
• All dropout children who do not receive vaccines as per the
scheduled doses are to be vaccinated. 14
---
• Vitamin A solution is to be administered to under five-year children
Nutrition • All under-six children are to be weighed every month and their height
to be recorded every quarter, and data is to be plotted on MCP card.
• Underweight and wasted children are to be identified and managed
appropriately.
• Identified SAM children with medical complications to be referred to
the NRC or health facility with pediatric care facilities.
• All under-six children to be provided supplementary nutrition.
Family • All eligible couples are to be given condoms, Combined Oral
Planning Contraceptives (COCs), Centchroman (Chhaya), Emergency
Services contraceptive pills (ECP) as per their choice and referrals to be made
for other contraceptive services.
HBV, Syphilis • Screening using POC kits and referral where required, ensuring
and HIV confidentiality.
Counselling • Counseling on Care during pregnancy, Danger signs during
pregnancy, Birth preparedness, Importance of nutrition, Institutional
delivery, Identification of referral transport, post-natal care,
Breastfeeding and complementary feeding, Care of a newborn,
Contraception, etc.



Source: nhm.gov.in/ MoHFW /NHM/ 2024



15
---
2
2

Ante Natal Checkup (ANC) and Post Natal Care (PNC)


During Ante Natal Care:



Early Registration

The first visit or registration of a pregnant women for ANC should take place as soon as the
pregnancy is suspected. Ideally, the first visit should take place in the first trimester before
or at the 12th week of pregnancy.
Number and timing of visits


Ensure that every pregnancy women makes at least 4 visits for ANC, including the first
visit/registration and any home visits by the ANM. The first visit is recommended as soon as
the pregnancy is suspected, the second visit should be schedules between the 4-6 months
(around 26 weeks). The third one should be planned in the 8th month (around 32 weeks), and
the fourth one in the 9th month (36-40 weeks)
ANC Schedule


At least 4 antenatal check-ups of every pregnant woman as per following schedule:
• 1st check-up: Within 12 weeks - preferably as soon as pregnancy is suspected & for
registration of pregnancy and first antenatal check-up.
• 2nd check-up: Between 14 and 26 weeks
• 3rd check-up: Between 28 and 34 weeks
• 4th check-up: Between 36 weeks and term
• 100% Registration/Follow up of all HRP



16
---
Activities during ANC

Following activities should be done during ANC:
ANC Weight Height Urine Hemoglobin Blood Blood Td HIV/
visit Test estimation Pressure Sugar vaccine Syphilis
1st ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
check-

up
2nd ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
check-

up
3rd ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
check-

up
4th ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
check-

up



Remember


• Availability of equipment such as functional adult weighing scale, functional B.P.
Instrument, functional thermometer, inch tap, Uri sticks, fetoscope,
Hemoglobinometer, HIV/syphilis test kit, etc.
• Availability of Iron Folic Acid tablets (IFA), Calcium tablets, Albendazole tablets, and
Tetanus and adult diphtheria (Td) vaccine in adequate quantity.
• Iron sucrose (If Hb levels below 10gm/dl at PHC and above facilities)
• At least 4 doses of IV iron sucrose to pregnant women whose hemoglobin is <10 g/dl
within 28 days of duration (stop IFA for these duration).
• Proper monitoring of all services being provided.
During Post Natal Care:


The first 42 days after birth is the postnatal period and is crucial for the mother and the
newborn. First 48 hours, followed by the first one week are the most crucial period as most 17
---
of the fatal and near-fatal maternal and neonatal complications occur during this period.
Evidence has shown that more than 60% of maternal deaths take place during the post-
partum period.



Number and timing of post-partum visits:
Every pregnant woman and her newborn should be examined either by health service
provider as per the following schedule. In case woman is unable to come to health facility,
Health Service Provider should visit the mother for completing these examinations.
Visits Visits After home delivery After delivery at PHC/FRU
Delivery at HWC-SC (Woman discharged after 48 hours)
First visit 1st day (within 24 hours) NA*
Second visit 3rd day after delivery 3rd day after delivery
Third visit 7th day after delivery 7th day after delivery
Fourth visit 6 weeks after delivery 6 weeks after delivery
*In case the mother and the newborn return home before 24 hours, then PNC visit should be
planned on 1st day for institutional delivery.



Source: www.nhm.gov.in / MoHFW / 2023



18
---
3
3

Janani Suraksha Yojana


Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY) is a safe motherhood intervention under the National Rural
Health Mission (NHM). It promotes institutional delivery among pregnant women especially
with weak socio-economic status i.e. women from Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
BPL households. The scheme is under implementation in all states and Union Territories
(UTs), with a special focus on Low Performing States (LPS)
Background


About 56,000 women in India die every year due to pregnancy related complications. Similarly,
every year more than 13 lakh infants die within 1 year of the birth and out of these
approximately 2/3rd of the infant deaths take place within the first four weeks of life. Out of
these, approximately 75% of the deaths take place within a week of the birth and a majority
of these occur in the first two days after birth.
In order to reduce the maternal and infant mortality, Reproductive and Child Health
Programme under the National Health Mission (NHM) is being implemented to promote
institutional deliveries so that skilled attendance at birth is available and women and new
born can be saved from pregnancy related deaths.
Objective


Reducing maternal and infant mortality by promoting institutional delivery among pregnant
women, especially with weak socio-economic status i.e. women from Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and BPL households.
Target Group and benefits


The scheme focuses on poor pregnant woman with a special dispensation for states that
have low institutional delivery rates, namely, the states of Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Bihar,
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Assam, Rajasthan, Odisha, and Jammu and
Kashmir. While these states have been named Low Performing States (LPS), the remaining
states have been named High Performing states (HPS). In LPS, the financial incentive is



19
---
available to all women regardless of age and number of children for delivery in government /
private accredited health facilities.
The scheme also provides performance-based incentives to women health volunteers known
as ASHA (Accredited Social Health Activist) for promoting institutional delivery among
pregnant women. Under this initiative, eligible pregnant women are entitled to get JSY benefit
directly into their bank accounts. Cash entitlement for different categories of mothers is as
follows:
Cash Assistance for Institutional Delivery (in Rs.)


Category Rural Area Urban Area
Mother’s package ASHA’s Mother’s ASHA’s
package package package
Low ₹1400 ₹600 ₹1000 ₹400
Performing All women regardless of age and
States - LPS number of children for delivery in
government / private accredited
health facilities
HPS ₹700/- ₹600 ₹600 ₹400
All BPL/Scheduled
Caste/Scheduled Tribe (SC/ST)
women delivering in a
government/private accredited
health facility



Source: nhm.gov.in / National Health Mission / MoHFW



20
---
4
4

Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakaram (JSSK)


Introduction

Government of India has launched the Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakaram (JSSK) on 1st
June, 2011. The scheme is to benefit pregnant women who access Government health
facilities for their delivery. Moreover it will motivate those who still choose to deliver at their
homes to opt for institutional deliveries. All the States and UTs have initiated implementation
of the scheme.
Situation


High out of pocket expenses being incurred by pregnant women and their families in the case
of institutional deliveries in form of drugs, User charges, diagnostic tests, diet, for C –
sections.
The New Initiative


In view of the difficulty being faced by the pregnant women and parents of sick new- born
along-with high out of pocket expenses incurred by them on delivery and treatment of sick-
new-born, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) has taken a major initiative to
evolve a consensus on the part of all States to provide completely free and cashless services
to pregnant women including normal deliveries and caesarean operations and sick new born
(up to 30 days after birth) in Government health institutions in both rural and urban areas.
The following are the Free Entitlements for pregnant women:
• Free and cashless delivery
• Free C-Section
• Free drugs and consumables
• Free diagnostics
• Free diet during stay in the health institutions
• Free provision of blood
• Exemption from user charges
• Free transport from home to health institutions 21
---
• Free transport between facilities in case of referral
• Free drop back from Institutions to home after 48hrs stay
The following are the Free Entitlements for Sick newborns till 30 days after birth. This has
now been expanded to cover sick infants:
• Free treatment
• Free drugs and consumables
• Free diagnostics
• Free provision of blood
• Exemption from user charges
• Free Transport from Home to Health Institutions
• Free Transport between facilities in case of referral
• Free drop Back from Institutions to home
Key features of the scheme


The initiative entitles all pregnant women delivering in public health institutions to absolutely
free and no expense delivery, including caesarean section.
The entitlements include free drugs and consumables, free diet up to 3 days during normal
delivery and up to 7 days for C-section, free diagnostics, and free blood wherever required.
This initiative also provides for free transport from home to institution, between facilities in
case of a referral and drop back home. Similar entitlements have been put in place for all sick
newborns accessing public health institutions for treatment till 30 days after birth. This has
now been expanded to cover sick infants.
The scheme aims to eliminate out of pocket expenses incurred by the pregnant women and
sick new borne while accessing services at Government health facilities.
The scheme is estimated to benefit more than 12 million pregnant women who access
Government health facilities for their delivery. Moreover, it will motivate those who still
choose to deliver at their homes to opt for institutional deliveries. All the States and UTs have
initiated implementation of the scheme



Source: www.nhm.gov.in /National Health Mission / MoHFW 22
---
55

Pradhanmatri Surakshit Matritva Abhiyan (PMSMA)


Introduction:

• The Pradhan Mantri Surakshit Matritva Abhiyan has been launched by the Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW), Government of India. The program aims to provide
assured, comprehensive and quality antenatal care, free of cost, universally to all
pregnant women on the 9th of every month.
• Hon’ble Prime Minister highlighted the aim and purpose of introduction of the Pradhan
Mantri Surakshit Matritva Abhiyan in the 31st July 2016 episode of Mann Ki Baat.
• PMSMA guarantees a minimum package of antenatal care services to women in their
2nd / 3rd trimesters of pregnancy at designated government health facilities
• The programme follows a systematic approach for engagement with private sector
which includes motivating private practitioners to volunteer for the campaign
developing strategies for generating awareness and appealing to the private sector to
participate in the Abhiyan at government health facilities.
• For Individual HRP tracking, MoHFW launched e-PMSMA (Extended -Pradhan Mantri
Surakshit Matritva Abhiyan) on January 2022. Furthermore, for tracking Individual
High-Risk Pregnancy (HRP), Ministry has developed additional feature in existing
PMSMA portal.
Rationale for the program


• Data indicates that Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) in India was very high in the year
1990 with 556 women dying during child birth per hundred thousand live births as
compared to the global MMR of 385/lakh live births
• Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) of India has declined by 459 points from 556 per one
lakh live births in 1990 to 97 in 2018-2020 as per Sample Registration System (SRS).
A decline of 83% has been achieved in MMR since 1990, which is higher than the
global decline of 45%
• While India has made considerable progress in the reduction of maternal and infant
mortality, every year approximately 24000 (MMEIG 2020 Report) women still die due
to pregnancy-related causes and approximately 5.40 lakh infants die within the first
28 days of life (SRS 2020) 23
---
• Many of these deaths are preventable and many lives can be saved if quality care is
provided to pregnant women during their antenatal period and high-risk factors such
as severe anemia, pregnancy-induced hypertension etc are detected on time and
managed well.
Goal of the PMSMA


Pradhan Mantri Surakshit Matritva Abhiyan envisages to improve the quality and
coverage of Antenatal Care (ANC) including diagnostics and counselling services as
part of the Reproductive Maternal Neonatal Child and Adolescent Health
(RMNCH+A) Strategy.
Objectives of the PMSMA


• Ensure at least one antenatal checkup for all pregnant women in their second or third
trimester by a physician/specialist
• Improve the quality of care during ante-natal visits. This includes ensuring provision
of the following services:
• All applicable diagnostic services
• Screening for the applicable clinical conditions
• Appropriate management of any existing clinical condition such as Anaemia,
Pregnancy induced hypertension, Gestational Diabetes etc.
• Appropriate counselling services and proper documentation of services rendered
• Additional service opportunity to pregnant women who have missed ante-natal visits
• Identification and line-listing of high-risk pregnancies based on obstetric/ medical
history and existing clinical conditions.
• Appropriate birth planning and complication readiness for each pregnant woman
especially those identified with any risk factor or comorbid condition.
• Special emphasis on early diagnosis, adequate and appropriate management of
women with malnutrition.
• Special focus on adolescent and early pregnancies as these pregnancies need extra
and specialized care



24
---
Key Features of PMSMA

• PMSMA is based on the premise — that if every pregnant woman in India is examined
by a physician and appropriately investigated at least once during the PMSMA and
then appropriately followed up — the process can result in reduction in the number
of maternal and neonatal deaths in our country.
• Antenatal checkup services would be provided by OBGY specialists /
Radiologist/physicians with support from private sector doctors to supplement the
efforts of the government sector.
• A minimum package of antenatal care services (including investigations and drugs)
would be provided to the beneficiaries on the 9th day of every month at identified
public health facilities (PHCs/ CHCs, DHs/ urban health facilities etc) in both urban
and rural areas in addition to the routine ANC at the health facility/ outreach.
• Using the principles of a single window system, it is envisaged that a minimum
package of investigations (including one ultrasound during the 2nd trimester of
pregnancy) and medicines such as IFA supplements, calcium supplements etc would
be provided to all pregnant women attending the PMSMA clinics.
• While the target would reach out to all pregnant women, special efforts would be
made to reach out to women who have not registered for ANC (left out/missed ANC)
and also those who have registered but not availed ANC services (dropout) as well as
High Risk pregnant women.
• OBGY specialists/ Radiologist/physicians from private sector would be encouraged
to provide voluntary services at public health facilities where government sector
practitioners are not available or inadequate.
• Pregnant women would be given Mother and Child Protection Cards and safe
motherhood booklets.
• One of the critical components of the Abhiyan is identification and follow up of high
risk pregnancies. A sticker indicating the condition and risk factor of the pregnant
women would be added onto MCP card for each visit:
• Green Sticker- for women with no risk factor detected
• Red Sticker – for women with high-risk pregnancy
• A National Portal for PMSMA and a Mobile application have been developed to
facilitate the engagement of private/ voluntary sector.
25
---
• ‘IPledgeFor9’ Achievers Awards have been devised to celebrate individual and team
achievements and acknowledge voluntary contributions for PMSMA in states and
districts across India.
• For further details kindly refer to the detailed operational framework for the Pradhan
Mantri Surakshit Matritva Abhiyan (PMSMA).



Key features of E-PMSMA


• Name- based line listing of HRPs
• Provision of additional PMSMA Session (Max 4 times in a month)
• Individual tracking of HRP up to healthy outcome (till 45th day after delivery)



Source: https://pmsma.mohfw.gov.in/about-scheme/#about year 2024



26
---
66

SUMAN (Surakshit Matritva Aashwasan)


INTRODUCTION

Improving the well-being of mothers, infants and children is an important public health goal
for the Government of India (GoI). A healthy woman forms the cornerstone of a healthy,
dynamic and progressive nation. Safe pregnancy, child birth and postpartum period are
important milestones in the continuum of care for women to achieve optimal maternal and
neonatal outcomes that have a significant impact on the future of mothers, children and
families in the long run.
With that aim the Government of India has launched “SUMAN – Surakshit Matritva
Aashwasan” a multipronged and coordinated policy approach that subsumes all existing
initiatives under one umbrella in order to create a comprehensive initiative which goes
beyond entitlements and provides a service guarantee for the entitlements. Simultaneously
it also underlines the commitment of the government for addressing the existing inequities
in maternal and newborn health care services and move towards zero preventable maternal
and newborn deaths.
The SUMAN initiative was launched by the honourable Health Minister on 10th October
2019, at the 13th conclave of the Central Council of Ministers, wherein the GoI and the State
Governments collectively committed to achieve zero preventable maternal and newborn
deaths in the country and providing service assurance for maternal and newborn care
services.
SUMAN promotes safe pregnancy, childbirth and immediate postpartum care with
respect and dignity by translating the entitlements into a service guarantee which is
more meaningful to the beneficiaries.
VISION


To create a responsive health care system which strives to achieve zero maternal and infant
deaths through quality care provided with dignity and respect.



GOAL

27
---
To end all preventable maternal and newborn deaths.
OBJECTIVES


Assured, dignified, respectful and quality healthcare at no cost and zero tolerance for denial
of services for every woman and newborn visiting the public health facility to end all
preventable maternal and newborn deaths and morbidities and provide a positive birthing
experience.
• Provide high quality medical and emergency services and referrals
• Create a responsive health care system
• Use institutional and other community-based platforms to spread awareness,
mobilize community and facilitate 100% reporting & review of Maternal Deaths
• Develop and establish a system of continuous client feedback and redressal of
grievances
• Provide an interdepartmental platform for convergent action plans.
• Effective governance including formulating strategies, supervision and review of the
program for corrective actions.
BENEFICIARIES OF THE INITIATIVE:


• All Pregnant Women
• All mother up to 6 months post-delivery
• All Sick infants
ENTITLEMENTS UNDER THE INITIATIVE


• Provision of at-least 4 ANC checkups, one PMSMA checkup & six HBNC visits
• Free transport from home to health institution dial 102(108)
• Assured referral services with scope of reaching health facility within 1 hour of
any critical case emergency.
• Deliveries by trained personnel (including Midwife/SBA)
• Elimination of Mother to Child Transmission (EMTCT) of HIV, HBV & Syphilis



28
---
• Choice for Delayed Cord Clamping up to delivery of placenta in uncomplicated
deliveries
• Post partum FP counseling & IEC/BCC for safe motherhood
• Respectful Care with privacy and dignity
• Early Initiation and support for Breastfeeding
• Management of sick neonates
• Zero dose vaccination
• Birth registration certificates from healthcare facilities.
• Conditional cash transfers/direct benefit transfer under various schemes
• Drop back from institution to home after due discharge (minimum 48 hrs.)
• Free and zero expense delivery and C-section facility in case of complications
at public health facilities
• Time bound redressal of grievances including through a responsive call
center/helpline.
Broad Pillars of the Initiatives


SERVICE GUARANTEE:
JSSK, JSY, PMSMA, LaQshya, MAA, care for sick & small babies, Home based care for
mothers & newborn
COMMUNITY AWARENESS:
Involving VHSNC and SHGs, Community Champions
HEALTH SYSTEM STRENGTHENING
Infrastructure- LDR, OT, Obstetric HDU/ICU, NBCC, NBSU, SNCU, Human resource, Drugs
and diagnostics, Referral systems, Creating centres of excellence
MONITORING & REPORTING
Service Guarantee Charter, Grievance redressal including responsive call center for better
redressal, ensured availability of MCP card and Safe motherhood booklet
Source: SUMAN standard operational guidelines, NHM / nhm.gov.in



29
---
77

Midwifery


Introduction to Midwifery:

The provision of midwifery is witnessing long awaited increase in global attention.
Recognizing the significant contribution made by midwives worldwide, many countries are
giving centre stage to midwives in order to improve quality of care, reduce “over-
medicalization” during child birth and increase efficient use of resources.
What is midwifery?


“Skilled, knowledgeable and compassionate care for childbearing women, new-born infants
and families across the continuum throughout pre-pregnancy, pregnancy, birth, postpartum
and the early weeks of life. Core characteristics include optimising normal biological,
psychological, social and cultural processes of reproduction and early life; timely prevention
and management of complications; consultation with and referral to other services; respect
for women’s individual circumstances and views; and working in partnership with women to
strengthen women’s own capabilities to care for themselves and their families.” (Lancet
Series on Midwifery, 2014)
Who is a midwife?


“A midwife is a person who has successfully completed a midwifery education programme
that is duly recognized in the country where it is located and that is based on the International
Confederation of Midwives (ICM) Essential Competencies for Basic Midwifery Practice and
the framework of the ICM Global Standards for Midwifery Education; who has acquired the
requisite qualifications to be registered and/or legally licensed to practice midwifery and use
the title ‘midwife’ and who demonstrates competency in the practice of midwifery.”
(International Confederation of Midwives, 2015)



30
---
Why does India need midwifery?

Global evidence has shown that the introduction of midwifery care has historically translated
into the increased availability of quality maternal and newborn health services, and
significantly aided the reduction of maternal and newborn mortality and morbidity.
Goal:


The ‘Midwifery Services Initiative’ aims to create a cadre of Nurse Practitioners in Midwifery
who are skilled in accordance to ICM competencies, knowledgeable and capable of
providing compassionate women-centre, reproductive, maternal and newborn health care
services and also develop an enabling environment for integration of this cadre into the public
health system, in order to achieve the SDGs for maternal and newborn health.
Objectives:


• To provide access to quality maternal and newborn health services and promote
natural birthing by promoting positive child birthing experience.
• To promote respectful maternity care throughout pregnancy and child birth.
• To identify, manage, stabilize and/or refer as needed, women and their newborns
experiencing complications.
• To decongest higher level of healthcare facilities.
• To expand access to quality maternal and neonatal services in remote areas including
pockets of high home delivery rates and urban slums



Source: Guidelines on MIDWIFERY SERVICES IN INDIA 2018 / NHM/MoHFW



31
---
8
8

MDR Maternal Perinatal Death Surveillance Review


Introduction

The first and foremost step of the Maternal Death Review process is preparing a line list of
all the maternal deaths in the area following which Facility and/or Community based
maternal death reviews are to be undertaken. Currently approximately 50% of the estimated
Maternal Deaths across the country are being reported by States/ UT s. Improving the
surveillance and reporting of maternal deaths is thus critical. State level MDSR Committees
(details described later) must take the following key steps to improve the same:
Monitor whether Maternal Deaths are being reported by all high delivery facilities (facilities
conducting more than 1000 deliveries/ year).
Monitor the district-wise number of deaths reported against estimated - identify the number
of districts that have zero/ poor reporting and focus on improving reporting from these
districts.
Analysis of reported maternal death data indicates that approximately 20% of the maternal
deaths occur at medical colleges and approximately 15% occur at private hospitals. This
would obviously differ across States. However, data highlights an urgent need to conduct a
mapping of the medical colleges and tertiary institutes in the State and monitor whether they
are reporting and reviewing maternal deaths. States must also focus on improving reporting
from private tertiary level institutions with the help of regulatory mechanisms such as the
Clinical Establishment Act.
Analysis of available data also highlights that approximately 20% of the maternal deaths
could happen during transit. States must thus monitor the number of deaths occurring during
transit and the mechanism for reporting of deaths occurring during transits (both for private
and government vehicles).
Identify areas of high home delivery and monitor whether maternal deaths are being reported
from these areas.



32
---
All the maternal deaths reported will be investigated, irrespective of the place of death i.e. at
home, in facility or in transit; area of death i.e. rural or urban. Maternal death review process
will be undertaken at two levels:
1. Community level
2. Facility level
In addition, confidential review of cases of maternal deaths occurred at facility will be
conducted at state level by the expert members of Committee for Confidential Review (CCR)
to review the clinical line of management of cases.
Community Based MDSR (CBMDSR)


Community based MDSR is a method of identifying personal, family or community factors
that may have contributed to the death by interviewing people such as family members or
neighbours who are knowledgeable about the events leading to the death. Interview is done
by using a verbal autopsy format.
Community based reviews must be taken up for all deaths that occur in the specified
geographical area, irrespective of the place of death, be it at home, facility or in transit.
District Nodal Officer (DN O) will ensure that all the maternal deaths reported by facilities
will be investigated at community level also.
Steps for Community Based MDSR
A. Notification of maternal death
B. Investigation
C. Data transmission
D. Analysis
E. Review
Facility Based MDSR (FBMDSR)


Facility Based Maternal Deaths Reviews are undertaken with the objective of improving the
quality of services and responsiveness of the facility in the emergency situations by
assessing the details of services provided with the help of format filled from the case sheet 33
---
and by interviewing the close family members if needed. It is a process of learning lessons
from the events happened in the past to prevent similar incidences in future.
FBMDSR will be taken up for all Government teaching hospitals, referral hospitals and
secondary level hospitals under other departments like Corporation, Railway, ESI C etc.,
district hospital, sub-district and CHCs conducting more than 1000 deliveries/ year. If
regulatory mechanisms exist, States would instruct private tertiary care institutions to
undertake maternal death reviews. All maternal deaths should be reported within 24 hours
to District and State officials.
Steps of Facility Based MDSR


A. Notification of maternal death
B. Investigation
C. Data transmission
D. Analysis
E. Review
Source: Guidelines for Maternal Death Surveillance and Response/NHM



34
---
9
9

Labour Room (LR)


Introduction

A labour room, also known as a delivery room or birthing room, is a specialized healthcare
facility within a hospital or maternity center where pregnant women undergo labor and
delivery. It is designed to ensure the safe and comfortable delivery of babies while
maintaining high standards of hygiene and medical care to reduce risks to both the mother
and the newborn. Key Features of a Labour Room:
• Hygienic Environment: Strict infection control measures are maintained to prevent
infections to the mother and baby.
• Medical Equipment: Equipped with essential tools like delivery beds, foetal
monitors, oxygen supplies, sterilized instruments, and resuscitation equipment.
• Trained Staff: Staffed by obstetricians, nurses, midwives, and anaesthesiologists
who provide skilled care during childbirth.
• Emergency Readiness: Facilities to handle obstetric emergencies such as
postpartum haemorrhage, obstructed labor, or foetal distress.
• Comfort Measures: Includes provisions for pain relief, privacy, and support for the
mother during labor.
• Neonatal Care: Readily available neonatal equipment for immediate care of the
newborn, such as incubators and radiant warmers.
Purpose:


• To provide a safe space for mothers to deliver their babies.
• To monitor and manage labor progression.
• To address any complications swiftly and effectively.
• To offer emotional and physical support to mothers.
• The design and operation of a labour room are critical in ensuring positive health
outcomes and minimizing maternal and neonatal mortality.
• To avoid direct entry
Source: Labour room / NHM
35
---
CHILD HEALTH

36
---
1
1

Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK)


Introduction

• Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK) is a new initiative aiming at early
identification and early intervention for children from birth to 18 years to cover 4
‘D’s viz. Defects at birth, Deficiencies, Diseases, Development delays including
disability.
• It is important to note that the 0-6 years age group will be specifically
managed at District Early Intervention Center ( D E I C ) l e v e l while
for 6 -18 years age group, management of conditions will be done through existing
public health facilities. DEIC will act as referral linkages for both the age groups.
• First level of screening is to be done at all delivery points through existing Medical
Officers, Staff Nurses and ANMs. After 48 hours till 6 weeks the screening of
newborns will be done by ASHA at home as a part of HBNC package.
• Outreach screening will be done by dedicated mobile block level teams for 6
weeks to 6 years at Anganwadi centers and 6 - 18 years children at school.
• Once the child is screened and referred from any of these points of identification, it
would be ensured that the necessary treatment/intervention is delivered at zero cost
to the family.
Target age group


The services aim to cover children of 0 -6 years of age in rural areas and urban
slums in addition to children enrolled in classes I to XII in Government and Government
aided Schools. It is expected that these services will reach to about 27 crores children in a
phased manner. The broad category of age group and estimated beneficiary is as shown
below in the table. The children have been grouped in to three categories owing to the fact that
different sets of tools would be used and also different set of conditions could be prioritized.



37
---
Target group under Child Health Screening and Intervention Service Categories
Categories Age Group Estimated
Coverage
Babies born at public health facilities and Birth to 6 weeks 2 crores
home
Preschool children in rural areas and urban 6weeks to 6 years 8 crores
slum
School children enrolled in class 1st and 6yrs to 18 yrs 17 crores
12th in government and government aided
schools



Health conditions to be screened


Child Health Screening and Early Intervention Services under RBSK envisages to cover 30
selected health conditions for Screening, early detection and free management. States
and UTs may also include diseases namely h y p o t h y r o i d i s m , S i c k l e cell
anemia and Beta Thalassemia based on epidemiological situation and availability of
testing and specialized support facilities within State and UTs.
Selected Health Conditions for Child Health Screening & Early Intervention Services
Defects at Birth Deficiencies
Neural tube defect Anemia especially Severe anemia
Down's Syndrome Vitamin A deficiency (Bitot spot)
Cleft Lip & Palate / Cleft palate alone Vitamin D Deficiency, (Rickets)
Talipes (club foot) Severe Acute Malnutrition
Developmental dysplasia of the hip Goiter
Congenital cataract
Congenital deafness
Congenital heart diseases
Retinopathy of Prematurity
Diseases of Childhood Developmental delays and Disabilities
38
---
Skin conditions (Scabies, fungal Vision Impairment
infection and Eczema) Hearing Impairment
Otitis Media Neuro-motor Impairment
Rheumatic heart disease Motor delay
Reactive airway disease Cognitive delay
Dental conditions Language delay
Convulsive disorders Behavior disorder (Autism)
Learning disorder
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
30. Congenital Hypothyroidism, Sickle cell anemia, Beta thalassemia (Optional)
Mechanisms for screening at Community & Facility level:


Child screening under RBSK is at two levels community level and facility level.
While facility based new born screening at public health facilities like PHCs / CHCs/ DH,
will be by existing health manpower like Medical Officers, Staff Nurses & ANMs, the
community level screening will be conducted by the Mobile health teams at Anganwadi
Centres and Government and Government aided Schools.
Screening at Anganwadi Centre


All pre-school children below 6 years of age would be screened by Mobile Block Health
teams for deficiencies, diseases, developmental delays including disability at the Anganwadi
centre at least twice a y e a r . Tool f o r s c r e e n i n g f o r 0 -6
y e a r s i s s u p p o r t e d b y pictorial, job aids specifically for
developmental delays. For developmental delays children would be screened using age
specific tools specific and those suspected would be referred to DEIC for further
management.
Screening at Schools - Government and Government aided


School children age 6 to 18 years would be screened by Mobile Health teams for
deficiencies, diseases, developmental delays including disability, adolescent health at the
local schools at least once a year. The too used is questionnaire (preferably translated to
local or regional language) and clinical examination.



39
---
Composition of mobile health team

The mobile health team will consist of four members- two Doctors (AYUSH) one male and
one female, at least with a bachelor degree from an approved institution, one ANM/Staff
Nurse and one Pharmacist with proficiency in computer for data management



Suggested Composition of Mobile Health Team.
S.No Member Number
1 Medical officers (AYUSH) -1male and 1 female at least 2
with a bachelor degree from an approved institution
2 ANM/Staff Nurse 1
3 Pharmacist with proficiency in computer for data 1
management
*In case a Pharmacist is not available, other paramedics –Lab Technician or
Ophthalmic Assistant



Source: Operational guidelines of RBSK / National Health Mission



40
---
2
2

District Early Intervention Centre (DEIC)


Introduction

The purpose of a District Early Intervention Centre (DEIC) is to provide early identification
and intervention services for children with developmental delays, disabilities, and other
health conditions. DEICs are typically established as part of a larger healthcare system, to
promote early detection, diagnosis, and treatment of developmental issues in children.
Developmental impairment is a common problem in children health that occurs in
approximately 10% of the childhood population and even more among “at risk” children
discharged from the sick newborn care unit. Children, disabled or non-disabled, under 6
years of age, represent a rapidly growing segment in India. Children with disabilities are often
denied access to appropriate services. According to the National Sample Survey
Organization (NSSO 2002), the total number of disabled populations in India is
approximately 1.85 crores (1.8% of the population), however the actual estimates may be
higher. The idea behind early intervention is to intervene early and minimize disability. Once
the disability is already established then the intervention would include enhancement of
child development for the child to reach the highest potential for the child possible and
prevent progression to handicap that may arise from activity limitation.
Developmental intervention requires an interdisciplinary approach of a multidisciplinary
team placed under one roof. However, there are very few centers in India which provide such
services but even most of these centers do not have all the components required for
evaluation and intervention in a holistic way.
Goals and Services of A DEIC


DEIC should be aiming at early detection and early intervention so as to minimize disabilities
among growing children. WHO has stated that defect or developmental delay leads to
functional disability and these functional disability in turn lead to handicap if not addressed
adequately. The burden of this handicap is borne by the family and also by society. DEIC
should aim at detection of defect and minimize disability through intervention.
The broad goals and services for DEIC include:
41
---
Screening of children from birth-18 years for 4d’s
Early identification of selected Health Conditions
• Holistic assessment
• Investigations
• Diagnosis
• Intervention
• Referral
• Prevention
• Psycho-social interventions
Services to be Provided by a DEIC


A. CORE SERVICES:
Medical services – for diagnostic or evaluation purposes. Medical treatment of children
suffering from diseases and deficiencies. (Doctor: Pediatrician/ Medical officer)



Dental services – for problems of teeth, gums and oral hygiene in children from birth to
6 years esp. “Early Childhood Caries” (Dentist) Goals and Services of a DEIC



Occupational therapy & Physical therapy – services that relate to self-help skills,
adaptive behavior and play, sensory, motor, and postural development i.e. services to
prevent or lessen movement’s difficulties and related functional problems. Sensory
Integration, oro-motor and feeding difficulties. (Physiotherapist/Occupational therapist)



Psychological services – administering and interpreting psychological tests and
evaluation of a child’s behavior related to development, learning and mental health as
well as planning services including counseling, consultation, parent training, behavior
modification and knowledge of appropriate education programs. (Rehabilitation
Psychologist/Clinical Psychologist)



Cognition services – identifying cognitive delays and providing intervention to enhance
cognitive development, adaptive and learning behaviors. (Clinical Psychologist and Early
Interventionist)
42
---
Audiology – identifying and providing services for children with hearing loss among
children from birth to 6 years for both congenital deafness and also acquired deafness.
(Audiologist cum speech and language pathologist)



Speech-language pathology – services for children with delay in communication skills
or with motor skills such as weakness of muscles around the mouth or swallowing.
(Audiologist cum speech and language pathologist)



Vision services – identification of children with visual disorders or delays and providing
services and training to those children. (Optometrist).



Retinopathy of Prematurity (RoP) – for premature or preterm children. (Optometrist
and ophthalmologist)



Health services – health-related services necessary to enable a child to benefit from
other early intervention services.(Doctor)



Lab services – for routine blood investigations among children to begin with but slowly
would develop services for confirming congenital hypothyroidism, Thalassemia and
Sickle cell anemia or other inborn error of metabolism depending on the prevalence of
such diseases. (Lab technician)



Nutrition services – services that help address the nutritional needs of children that
include identifying feeding skills, feeding problems, food habits, and food preferences.
(Nutritionist/ Dietician or Nursing staff)



Social support services – preparing an assessment of the social and emotional
strengths and needs of a child and family, and providing individual or group services such
as counseling. Socio economic evaluation of the family and linkages with the need based
social services. (Social Worker /Psychologist)



43
---
Psycho-social services – includes designing learning environments and activities that
promote the child’s development, providing families with information, skills, and support
to enhance the child’s development. (Special Educator)



Transportation and related costs – providing or reimbursing the cost of travel necessary
to enable a child and family to receive any tertiary level services. (DEIC Manager)



Service coordination – (DEIC Manager)



Referral services following referral guidelines – children who are diagnosed for any of the
selected health conditions would receive follow-up referral support and treatment
including surgical interventions at tertiary level. (DEIC Manager)
Documentation and maintenance of case records, data storage for service delivery,
follow up and research. (Data entry operator)



Training and enhancing capability of multi-skilled community personnel in the district
and helping in operationalizing of early intervention services at blocks and in the
community and provide supportive supervision and domain specific referral services in
the community. (DEIC core Intervention team)



B. SUPPLEMENTARY SERVICES
Disability certificates: with other members of the disability board (DEIC Manager)
Liaison with other departments under various ministries: (DEIC Manager) e.g.



A) Disability division of Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (MoSJE):
• Assistive technology devices and services – equipment and services that are
used to improve or maintain the abilities of a child to participate in such
activities as Hearing, seeing (Vision), Moving, Communication and learning to
compensate with a specific biological limitation.



• Special Education services for School age groups from six to sixteen, pre-
vocational training for age 16-18 years and Vocational training for the age of 18



44
---
• Aids and appliances: Assistance to Disabled Persons for Purchase / Fitting of
Aids and Appliances under the “Assistance to Disabled Persons for Purchase/
Fitting of Aids/Appliances (ADIP)” Scheme, with the objective of assisting
needy persons with disabilities in procuring durable, sophisticated and
scientifically manufactured standard aids and appliances that can promote
their physical, social and psychological rehabilitation.
• Rehabilitation of the differently abled child above 6 years of age at the
Rehabilitation centers in that state e.g. District Disability Rehabilitation
Centers (DDRCs) for the districts where they are functional or Composite
Regional Centers (CRCs) or National Institutes/Regional Centers etc.
• Family support services esp. for children having Autism, Cerebral palsy,
Mental retardation, multiple disabilities. These Services would be to support
those children who would require long term support and would focus on
supporting the child in their natural environments and in their everyday
experiences and activities. All services would be provided using a family-
centered approach, recognizing the importance of working in partnership with
the family. However, whenever a detailed domain specific management
would be required, they would be referred to the DEIC.
• Guardianship
• Parent Associations
• Promoting advocacy for right-based society
• Social security’s such as disability scholarship and disability pension
• Linkages with Ministry of Human Resource Development (MoHRD),
Department of School Education & Literacy under “Education of Children with
Special Needs in “Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan”
• Provide inclusive education and support to children from age of 6 -14 years
• Provide Aids and appliances to school going children with special needs and
support of trained special educators to these children.
• To provide home based educational services to children with special needs on
need basis.
Source: Setting Up District Early Intervention Centres Operational guidelines /NHM /
MoHFW
45
---
8
3

Home Based Newborn Care (HBNC)


Introduction:

Home Based New Born Care (HBNC) programme was launched in 2011 for accelerated
reduction of Neonatal mortality and morbidity rates especially in rural, remote areas where
access to care is largely unavailable or located faraway. The guidelines were revised in 2014.
Under this programme, ASHA to make visits to all newborns according to specified schedule
up to first 42 days of life. This includes six visits in case of institutional deliveries on 3rd, 7th,
14th, 21st, 28th& 42nd days after birth and one additional visit within 24 hours of delivery in case
of home deliveries. Additional visits for babies who are pre-term, low birth weight or ill and
SNCU discharged babies will be conducted.
Key objectives of HBNC:


The objectives of Home-Based Neonatal Care (HBNC) are aimed at reducing neonatal
morbidity and mortality by addressing the health needs of newborns through community-
based interventions. Key objectives include:
1. Early Identification and Management of Health Issues:
Detect and manage common neonatal problems such as infections, jaundice,
hypothermia, low birth weight, and feeding difficulties.
2. Reducing Neonatal Mortality:
Prevent avoidable neonatal deaths through timely care, appropriate referrals, and
education of caregivers.
3. Promoting Essential Newborn Care:
Ensure implementation of essential practices like breastfeeding within the first hour,
exclusive breastfeeding, thermal protection, cord care, and hygiene.
4. Empowering Families and Caregivers:
Educate families about newborn care, danger signs, immunization, and the
importance of seeking healthcare when needed.



46
---
5. Timely Referrals:
Facilitate early referral of sick newborns to healthcare facilities for specialized care.
6. Capacity Building of Frontline Workers:
Train community health workers like ASHAs and ANMs in providing essential
neonatal care and managing common complications.
7. Enhancing Postnatal Care Coverage:
Increase the reach and effectiveness of postnatal care visits, especially in
underserved and rural areas.
8. Strengthening Health Systems:
Link home-based care to existing health systems for continuity of care and long-
term improvement in neonatal health.
Activities in HBNC


The major activities in Home-Based Neonatal Care (HBNC) focus on delivering essential
care, monitoring newborn health, and supporting families through trained frontline workers
like ASHAs. These activities include:
1. Essential Newborn Care
Promoting early initiation of breastfeeding within the first hour of birth and ensuring
•
exclusive breastfeeding.
Maintaining thermal protection (e.g., skin-to-skin contact and preventing
•
hypothermia).
Providing clean cord care and emphasizing hygienic practices.
•



2. Postnatal Home Visits
Conducting home visits as per the HBNC schedule (e.g., 6 visits for institutional births
•
and additional visits for home births).
Monitoring newborn health for signs of infections, feeding difficulties, or other
•
complications.
Recording and tracking weight, feeding patterns, and overall health.
•
47
---
3. Detection of Danger Signs
Identifying danger signs such as:
•
o Poor feeding or refusal to breastfeed.
o Hypothermia or fever.
o Rapid or difficulty breathing.
o Signs of infection (pus around the cord, lethargy).
Educating families about recognizing these signs.
•



4. Timely Referral
Facilitating referral to health facilities for newborns with complications or danger
•
signs.
Supporting families in accessing emergency care when needed.
•



5. Care for Low Birth Weight and Preterm Newborns
Promoting Kangaroo Mother Care (KMC) for warmth, feeding, and bonding.
•
Regular weight monitoring to assess growth.
•



6. Family Counselling
Educating families on:
•
o Importance of immunization and adherence to schedules.
o Maintaining hygiene to prevent infections.
o Nutrition for both the newborn and lactating mothers.
Addressing myths and misconceptions about neonatal care.
•



7. Documentation and Reporting
Maintaining a home visit register to record observations and actions taken.
•
Reporting health data to supervisors and linking it with health systems.
•



8. Capacity Building of Frontline Workers 48
---
• Regular training and refresher sessions for ASHAs and ANMs on HBNC protocols,
danger signs, and counselling techniques.
9. Linkage with Health Programs
Ensuring integration with programs like Routine Immunization, Integrated Child
•
Development Services (ICDS), and Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK).



Activities during home visit by ASHA


o Information and skills to the mother and family on how to do better care of newborn,
on special care for low weight babies, on how to identify danger signs and promote
exclusive breastfeeding and immunization
o Examining every newborn for prematurity and low birth weight, identification of
illness, anything unusual in baby, provision of appropriate care at home, refer to ANM
or nearest health facilities as defined in the protocols
o Follow up for sick newborns after they are discharged from facilities.
o Counselling the mother on postpartum care, recognition of postpartum
complications and enabling referral
o Counseling the mother for adoption of an appropriate family planning method.
Activities to be ensured during HBNC visits
Weight Respiratory Identification of danger Counselling
Temperature Count of sign in to mother
newborn Newborn Mother and care
givers
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓



Source: HBNC Guidelines 2014 / NHM



49
---
44

Home Based Care of Young Child (HBYC)


Introduction

Home-Based Care for Young Child Programme (HBYC) was launched in 2018 as part of
National Health Mission and POSHAN Abhiyan for promotion of health and nutrition of young
children (3-15 months), for reducing child morbidity and mortality and for promotion of
growth and Early Childhood Development. Under HBYC, ASHA provides incentivized five
home visits on 3rd, 6th, 9th, 12th and 15th months. ASHAs are being paid incentive of
Rs.250/- per HBYC category child for five scheduled home visits.
Objectives


The objective of Home-Based Care for Young Child is to reduce child mortality and morbidity
and improve nutrition status, growth and early childhood development of young children
through structured, focused and effective home visits by ASHAs.

Purpose of Home Visits
The purpose of the additional home visits by ASHAs are promotion of evidence-based

interventions delivered in four key domains namely nutrition, health, child development and
WASH (water, sanitation & hygiene).
Specific Action during HBYC


Nutrition
• Exclusive breastfeeding for six months
• Adequate complementary feeding from six months and continued
• breast feeding up to two years of age
• Iron and folic acid (IFA) supplementation
• Promote use of fortified food
Health
• Full immunization for children
• Regular growth monitoring
• Appropriate use of Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS) during diarrhoea episodes 50
---
• Early care seeking during sickness
Child Development
• Age-appropriate play and communication for children
WASH
• Appropriate Handwashing practices
Strategies


Under Home Based Care of Young Child (HBYC) programme, the additional five home visits
will be carried out by ASHA with support from Anganwadi workers. From 2–3-month onward
ASHAs will provide quarterly home visits (3rd, 6th, 9th, 12th and 15th months) and ensure
exclusive and continued breastfeeding, adequate complementary feeding, age-appropriate
immunization and early childhood development. The quarterly home visits schedule for low-
birth-weight babies, SNCU & NRC discharges will now be harmonized with the new HBYC
schedule.
Anganwadi workers will continue to provide ‘Take Home Ration’ and nutrition-specific
counselling to mothers. In addition, she will record weight of the young children and monitor
growth and development using MCP card as per guidelines. Based on the growth chart,
underweight children will be identified and taken up for further management.
Task of ASHAs and AWWs under HBYC


Home Visits ASHAs AWWs
At 3rd Month • Support for exclusive • Monthly weighing of infants
breastfeeding • Weight recording and plotting
• Counsel on hand washing on growth chart
practices • Detect underweight children
• Appropriate play and & take further action
communication • Counsel mother for exclusive
• Check immunization status • breast feeding
• Check weight recording in
MCP card; identify growth
faltering 51
---
At 6th, 9th, • All above activities PLUS • Take Home Ration’ and
12th and • Counsel on initiation of nutrition specific counselling
15th complementary feeding & to mothers
Months continued breastfeeding • Monthly weighing and
• Age appropriate & adequate supplementary food from
complementary feeding for AWC
children • Counselling regarding
• Age-appropriate play and complementary feeding
communication • Weight recording on growth
• Ensure full immunization chart;
• Distribution of prophylactic • detect underweight children
IFA and ORS and & take further action
counselling for their • Record length/height
appropriate usage • Counsel for deworming of
• Depot holder for ORS & Zinc children
• above 1 year of age



5 days HBYC training of ASHA. After completion of training, ASHA should be capable for
HBYC and home visits with an HBYC kit (ECD kit) containing toys, torch, mirror, bell, bangle
(to assess child for developmental delay), ARI timer, functional Thermometer, ORS and IFA
Syrup with ASHA.



Source: Home Based Care for Young Child (HBYC) Strengthening of Health & Nutrition
through Home Visits OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES April 2018 / NHM



52
---
5
5

Child Death Surveillance & Response (CDSR)


Background

Reducing infant mortality is one of the key goals under NHM. The infant and under five child
mortality has shown a steady decline over the last few years. This operational guideline is
designed for use by Health Care Service Providers, Programme Managers and Administrators
at different levels of public health system to assist them in undertaking systematic Child
Death Review (CDR) and use this information to improve the on-going child health
interventions and accordingly plan for the future.
Objectives


• To specify the steps for CDSR at the health facility and community levels.
• To specify the roles and responsibilities of community health workers, service
providers, programme managers and data entry operators at different levels in the
conduct of CDSR.
• To provide relevant tools for the conduct of CDSR.
• To provide clear guidance on the process of data collection, data flow, data analysis,
review and feedback.
Working definitions to conduct CDSR:


Neonatal Deaths: Neonatal deaths are deaths occurring during the neonatal period,
commencing at birth and ending 28 completed days after birth.



Post-Neonatal Deaths: Deaths occurring from 29 days of life to less than one year
are called post-neonatal deaths.



Infant Deaths: Deaths of children less than 1 year of age.



Child Deaths: Deaths of children less than 5 years of age.



53
---
Still Birth: Still birth is the birth of a new born after 20th completed week of gestation,
weighing 500gm or more, when the baby does not breathe or show any sign of life after
delivery.



Child Death Surveillance & Review – operational plan


Children in the age group 0-5 years will be included in the review. All deaths in this age group
will be reported irrespective of the place it takes place: at home, in health facility or in
transit; area of death i.e. rural or urban.



The review processes will remain the same for all children; however, the details to be
investigated will vary in neonates (0-28 days) and children (29 days-5 years).



Child Death Review will be of two types:
1. Community Based Child Death Surveillance & Review (CBCDSR)
2. Facility Based Child Death Surveillance & Review (FBCDSR)



Online Portal of Maternal, Perinatal, Child Death Surveillance and Review
(MPCDSR) was released by Hon’ble Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare,
Government of India on 17th September 2021. This portal will enable real time recording
of all neonatal and child deaths, review causes and need based action can be taken
based on the report on timely manner.



Community-Based Child Death Surveillance & Review (CBCDSR)


Community-Based CDSR is a method of identifying personal, family, or community factors
that may have contributed to the death by interviewing people such as family members or
neighbours who are knowledgeable about the events leading to the death.



Initially, Community-based reviews would be undertaken for child deaths occurring at home
or in transit.



54
---
Steps for CBCDSR:

Involves Notification, Investigation, Data transmission, Analysis of Child death followed by
formulating and implementing remedial actions as deemed necessary to avert such
incidence in future.
Responsible person for CBCDSR


• For information regarding death- ANM/ASHA
• Fill first investigation report- ANM
• Detail verbal autopsy/Social autopsy – MO assign task to team
• Report of Death to Block level- MO/DEO
• Report of detail review death and social autopsy to RCHO- BCMO/BNO
• Collect all death review and social autopsy report at state- RCHO/DNO
• Conduct social review in DHS meeting- DPM (NUHM)



Facility-Based Child Death Review


Facility based reviews will be taken up in all MCHs, Teaching Hospitals, DHs, SDHs, SGHs,
Decentralised Hospitals, RHs, BPHCs.



FBCDSR committee will consist of the following members:
• MSVP/ Hospital Superintendent / BMOH / other administrative head of the institution.
• HOD, Dept. of Paediatrics
• FNO-CDSR (Paediatrician) and FNO-MDSR (Obstetrician)
• Paediatrician / Medical Officer posted in the Paediatrics
• One Anaesthesiologist
• MOIC of SNCU
• Nodal Asst. Superintendent (NM) looking after Maternal & Child Health.
• Nurse Staff of Paediatrics ward / SNCU



TOR of FBCDSR Committee:


• The committee will conduct child death review every week. FNO will fix the meeting
in discussion with the Hospital Superintendent / MSVP.
55
---
• The main focus of the review is to check the clinical protocols and the line of
treatment followed.
• FBCDSR formats and case summary will be discussed in the review meeting.
• The Committee will suggest corrective measures and steps to be taken to improve
quality of care at the hospital.
• The Committee will suggest steps to be taken at the Community level, District level
and State level.
• The FNO will send minutes of the meeting to the DNO along with the case summary
prepared.
• The Committee will review actionable points of the last meeting.



Steps for FBCDSR are as follows:


• Step 1: Notification of child death
• Step 2: Investigation of child death
• Step 3: Data transmission
• Step 4: Analysis of the data followed by making suitable action plans from it.



Responsible Person for FBCDSR


• For information regarding death- Nursing staff to in charge
• Detail verbal autopsy– MO / In charge assign task to team/health manager
• Report of Death to Block level- MO / In charge /DEO
• Report of detail review death and social autopsy to RCHO- BCMO/BNO/Health
manager
• Collect all death review and social autopsy report from MCH/DH/SDH/Block and sent
to state- RCHO/DNO
• Conduct social review in DHS meeting- DPM (NUHM)



Source: CDSR guidelines / NHM



56
---
66

Social Awareness and Action to Neutralize Pneumonia

Successfully (SAANS)

Background

Childhood pneumonia continues to be the topmost infectious killer among under-five
children, contributing to 17.51 percent of under-five deaths in India.
Pneumonia morbidity & mortality in India Number of episodes of 30 million
ARI/Pneumonia every year2
Incidence rate (per child per year) 0.22
Severe pneumonia cases out of total cases 3 million (10%)
Mortality rate per 1000 live births4 5.1
According to SRS 2020 Statistical report, the under-5 mortality is 32 per 1000 live births and
the goal of National Health Policy 2017 is to reduce U5MR to 23 per 1000 live births by 2025.
In order to achieve the National Health Policy goals, the Pneumonia mortality in children
needs to reduce to less than 3 per 1000 live births. This is also in tune with the goal of India
Integrated Action Plan for Pneumonia & Diarrhoea (IAPPD) in the State like Bihar, Madhya
Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh.
• Pneumonia being the number one of the leading causes of death of Under-five
children in India. It demands prioritization & more investment of resources.
• Early preparedness, roll out and monitoring of the SAANS 2023-24 campaign by
States/UTs and districts would be key to the success of control of childhood
pneumonia.
• Additional emphasis and focus for early identification and appropriate management
of childhood pneumonia cases through home visits by ASHAs and other front-line
workers during the campaign period.
• SAANS campaign should also focus on strengthening of health facilities for paediatric
care.
• Ensure that all eligible children receive 3 doses of Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine
(two primary doses at 6 weeks and 14 weeks and a booster dose at 9 months) as per



57
---
the national immunization schedule under the universal immunization programme
(UIP).
• Create Awareness about Indoor and Outdoor Air Pollution and its effects on Under 5
Children.
Goal


To intensify action for reducing mortality due to childhood Pneumonia in India to less than 3
per thousand live births by 2025.
It is expected that the SAANS (Social Awareness & Action to Neutralize Pneumonia
Successfully) campaign will ensure health system strengthening and community awareness
towards childhood pneumonia. The SAANS campaign will carry the tagline “Pneumonia
Nahi, Toh Bachpan sahi” which clearly establishes the positive impact of a Pneumonia Free
Childhood.
Objectives


• Adoption and adherence to National Childhood Pneumonia Management guidelines
2019
• Create awareness & mobilize community for Pneumonia Protection, Prevention &
Treatment
• Early identification and management of under-five children to detect suspected
pneumonia cases
• Strengthen facility-level management for cases of severe-pneumonia
SAANS Initiatives


Following is a suggested roadmap for implementation of SAANS campaign at the state/UT &
district level.
1. Organise state and district orientation cum planning meeting
2. Prepare implementation plans for State / District & Block as per annual PIPs
3. Paediatric care strengthening in health facilities including access to medical oxygen
4. Capacity building of heath staff
5. Use digital & mass media for community awareness generation and mobilization
6. Awareness & Promotion of Pneumococcal Vaccine (PCV) & its administration
7. Screen under-five children at household level 58
---
8. Management of suspected Pneumonia cases at Facilities
9. Supportive supervision and monitoring
10.Reporting and feedback mechanism
The campaign organizes from 12 November (Worlds Pneumonia Day) to 28 February
every year.
• Trained all frontline workers and MOs/SNs in 2 days SAANS program training.
• Orientation and training of all medical officers, Nursing staffs, CHOs, ANMs and
ASHAs regarding identification of pneumonia cases and management as per
guidelines.
• Timely identification of sign & symptoms of pneumonia and prompt referral of baby by
giving prereferral dose of amoxicillin syrup.
• Availability of indoor treatment of a pneumonia suffer child at every PHC/CHC.
• Regular and Timely data recording and reporting in prescribed formats.



Source: Childhood Pneumonia Management Guidelines” available on
https://nhm.gov.in/



59
---
66

STOP Diarrhea Campaign


Introduction

Reduction of childhood mortality to 23 per 1,000 live births by 2025 is one of the prime goals
of National Health Policy. Childhood diarrheal diseases continue to be a major killer among
under-five children in many states, contributing to 5.8 percent of under five deaths in the
country (Cause of Death Statistics 2017-19, Sample Registration System of Registrar
General of India). Around 50,000 children die due to diarrhea annually in the country.
Diarrheal deaths are usually clustered in summer and monsoon months and the worst
affected are children from poor socio-economic situations. Diarrhea is defined as the
passage of three or more loose or liquid stools per day (or more frequent passage than is
normal for the individual). Almost all the deaths due to diarrhea can be averted by preventing
and treating dehydration by using ORS (Oral Rehydration Solution) and administration of Zinc
tablets along with adequate nutritional intake by the child during diarrhea. Diarrhea can be
prevented by exclusive and continued breastfeeding, timely introduction of appropriate and
safe complementary feeding, use of safe drinking water, handwashing, sanitation and
immunization.



In continuation of the efforts of Diarrhea Management till 2023, this year Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare has renamed Diarrhea Campaign as “STOP Diarrhea Campaign” with the
slogan for the year 2024:
“Diarrhoea ki Roktham, Safai aur ORS se rakhen apna dhyaan”



STOP Diarrhea Campaign consists of a set of activities to be implemented in an intensified
manner during campaign period for prevention and control of deaths due to dehydration from
diarrhea across all States/UTs. These activities mainly include - intensification of advocacy
& awareness generation activities for diarrhea management utilizing inter-convergence of
various departments, strengthening service provision for diarrhea case management,
establishment of ORS-Zinc corners, prepositioning of ORS and Zinc by ASHA in households
with under-five children, awareness generation activities for hygiene and sanitation. 60
---
Goal of STOP Diarrhoea Campaign

The ultimate goal is to reach zero child deaths due to diarrhea.
Objectives


“STOP Diarrhea Campaign is a preparedness activity to address potentially high incidence of
diarrhea during the summer/monsoon season and floods / natural calamity. The objectives
are:
• To ensure high coverage of ORS and Zinc usage in children with diarrhea throughout
the country
• Inculcating appropriate behavior in care givers for diarrhea prevention & management
of under-five children, Special focus needs to be accorded to the high priority areas
(slums, drought/flood prone areas) and vulnerable communities.
Strategy


The focus is on delivery of simple proven interventions that have large impact towards
control of childhood diarrheal morbidity and mortality. The strategy is four folds, as below:
• Improved availability and use of ORS and Zinc at household level
• Facility level strengthening to manage cases of dehydration Enhanced advocacy and
communication on prevention and control diarrhea through Information, Education
and Communication (IEC)/Social Behaviors Change Communication (SBCC)
campaign
• Intersectoral convergence of relevant ministries and stakeholders for preventive
measures
Source: Guidance note on STOP Diarrhoea Campaign / NHM



61
---
77

Facility Based Newborn Care (FBNC)


Facility Based Newborn Care (FBNC) along with Home Based Newborn Care (HBNC) and
Home-Based Care for Young Child (HBYC) establishes a continuum of care to ensure that
every newborn receives essential services right from the time of birth and first 48 hours at
the health facility and then at home up to 15 months.
Facility Based Newborn Care Program:
Newborn Care Corners (NBCC)
Newborn Stabilization Units (NBSU)
Special Newborn Care Unit (SNCU)
Newborn Care Corner (NBCC)


New-born Care Corner (NBCC) is a designated space in the labor room & Obstetric OT which
is situated in draught free area, with equipment’s like radiant warmers, suction machines,
self-inflating bag/AMBU bag including masks of size 0 &1, Oxygen availability etc. NBCC is
established to provide support to newborns required resuscitation services and/or
assistance at the time of birth by Navjat Sishu Suraksha Karyakaram (NSSK) trained staff.
New-born Care Corners provide services during care at birth i.e. Prevention of Infection,
Provision of warmth, Resuscitation, Early initiation of breastfeeding, weighting of new-born,
immunization services, identification and prompt referral at risk or sick new-burns.
New-born Stabilization Unit (NBSU)


New-born Stabilization Units (NBSU) is 4-6 bedded unit established at the sub district level
for managing sick and small new-born that are not so seriously sick and can be managed at
first level of new-born care facility. Pre-referral stabilizing of sick & small new-born at NBSUs
before transfer to SNCU/NICU essentially improves the outcome of these babies.
Special New-born Care Unit (SNCU)


SNCU is a 12 bedded or larger unit located at district/Sub district hospitals and medical
colleges with dedicated and adequately trained doctors, staff nurses and support staff to 62
---
provide 24*7 comprehensive secondary level of new-born care to small and sick neonates.
The SNCU should have Patient Care area, Ancillary area and step down or MNCU area within
or in close proximity. The minimum recommended number of beds for and SNCU at all the
district hospital is 12. However, if the district hospital conducts more than 3000 deliveries
per year, 4 beds should be added for each 1000 additional deliveries.
SNCUs are providing the care for sick and small new-born i.e. Management of Low-birth-
weight infants < 1800 g, Management of all sick new-borns except those requiring
mechanical ventilation and major surgical interventions, follow-up services of all babies
discharged from the unit and high – risk new-borns, immunization services and referral
services. Operational cost budget is being provided to SNCUs for ensuring day to day
services and management as per FBNC operational guideline.
Mother Newborn Care unit:


The aim of this initiative is ‘no separation’ of mother and baby including small and sick babies
who require newborn care. The mother and newborn dyad are to be cared for together while
mother is empowered to participate in developmentally supportive care to her own newborn.
Services at different levels of facility based newborn care:
Newborn care corner Newborn Stabilization Special Newborn Care
(at all Delivery Points) units (FRUs/CHCs) Unit (Sub
District/District)
Care at Resuscitation, provision Resuscitation, Resuscitation,
birth of warmth, prevention provision of warmth provision of warmth,
of infection Prevention of infection, prevention of infection,
Early initiation of early initiation of early initiation of
breastfeeding, weighing breastfeeding breastfeeding and
the newborn weighing the newborn
Weighing the newborn
Care of Breastfeeding/ feeding Breastfeeding/ feeding Breastfeeding/ feeding
normal support support support
newborn



63
---
Care of Identification and Management of low- Managing of low-birth-
sick prompt referral of ‘at birth-weight infants weight infants
newborn risk’ and ‘sick’ newborn ≥1800 grams with no <1800grams
other complication Managing all sick
Phototherapy for newborns (except
newborns with hyper- those requiring
bilirubinemia mechanical ventilation
Management of and major surgical
newborn sepsis interventions)
Stabilization and Follow-up of all babies
referral of sick discharged from the
newborns and those unit and high-risk
with very low birth newborns
weight (rooming in) Referral services
Referral services



Kangaroo Mother Care:


Kangaroo Mother Care (KMC) is a simple method of care for low-birth-weight infants that
includes early and prolonged skin-to-skin contact with the mother (or a substitute caregiver)
and exclusive and frequent breastfeeding. This natural form of human care stabilizes body
temperature, promotes breast feeding, prevents infection and other morbidities. This also
leads to early discharge, better neurodevelopment and encourages bonding between mother
and infant.
KMC is initiated in the hospital and continued at home until the infant needs it and for
optimum care a regular follow-up should be ensured.
Kangaroo mother care has following components
Skin to skin contact
Exclusive breast feeding



64
---
KMC satisfies all five senses of the infant. The infant feels the mother’s warmth through skin-
to-skin contact (touch), listens to her voice and heartbeat (hearing), sucks breast milk (taste)
has eye contact with her (vision) and smells her odor (olfaction).
Though all LBW infants should be provided KMC but considering the huge burden at facilities,
priority must be given to infants with birth weight less than 2000 grams.
Minimum duration of a KMC session should be one hour because frequent handling may be
stressful for the infant. The duration of each KMC session should be gradually increased for
as long as the mother can comfortably provide KMC. GoI has implemented Family
Participatory Care and KMC can be practiced inside the SNCU/MNCU.



Source: Operational Guidelines for FBNC,
https://nhm.gov.in/index4.php?lang=1&level=0&linkid=484&lid=754



65
---
IMMUNIZATION

66
---
11

Universal Immunization Programme


Introduction

Immunization is one of the most cost-effective health investments and a success story for
global health and development. It is a well-established fact that, vaccination has reduced
morbidity and mortality due to many infections, cancers and other chronic diseases, globally.
Vaccination has played a major role in the battle on infectious diseases way back from 496
B.C, when the Greek historian Thucydides observed that those who survived smallpox would
never get re-infected. Edward Jenner, pioneered the concept of vaccines and developed the
smallpox vaccine, the world’s first vaccine that was introduced. The terms vaccine and
vaccination are derived from Variolae vaccine (‹smallpox of cow›), these terms were coined
by Jenner to denote cowpox. In 1798, he demonstrated, that inoculation of humans with live
vaccinia virus (cowpox) could protect against smallpox. This brought the first hope that the
disease could be controlled by vaccination.1
The Aim of UIP:


The aim of UIP is that eligible beneficiaries should get all UIP vaccines in India, so that they
may be protected from life threatening vaccine preventable diseases against which vaccines
are provided under UIP in India.

Objectives:
• To attain more than 90% full immunization coverage on a year-to-year basis and

sustain the gains
• To achieve MR elimination
• To maintain and sustain Polio free status and Maternal & Neonatal Tetanus
elimination
• To sustain robust VPD and AEFI surveillance
• To ensure efficient supply chain, cold chain and logistic system for UIP
• To provide regular supportive supervision to UIP
• To ensure accountability framework through regular task force meetings
• To expand digitization in UIP
• To introduce need based new vaccines
67
---
Immunization programme milestones – India

1977 India declared Smallpox free
1978 Expanded Programme of immunization (EPI) launched with BCG, DPT, OPV,
Typhoid (urban areas)
1983 TT vaccine for pregnant women
1985 EPI expanded nationwide as Universal Immunization Programme (UIP) with
addition of measles and removal of Typhoid vaccines; Focus on children less
than 1year of age
1986 Technology mission for expansion of UIP – Monitoring under PMO’s 20-point
programme
1990 Vitamin-A supplementation
1992 UIP became a part of Child survival and safe motherhood (CSSM) included both
UIP and Safe motherhood programme
1995 Polio National Immunization Days
1997 Vaccine Vial Monitor introduced in Polio vaccine for campaign. Later expanded
to all UIP vaccines in 2006 UIP became a part of RCH-1 programme
2001 National Technical Advisory Group on Immunization (NTAGI) in India was formed
2002 Hepatitis B vaccine introduced as pilot in 33 districts & 16 cities of 10 states
2005 Auto Disable (AD) Syringes introduced into UIP
2006 Immunization week strategy was introduced to strengthen immunization
Japanese Encephalitis (JE) vaccine introduced after campaigns in endemic
districts
2007- Hepatitis B vaccine expanded to all districts in 10 states
2008
2010 Measles 2nd dose introduced in RI (21 states) and after Measles vaccine catch
up campaign (MCUP) (14 states) covering 9 months-10 years over a period of 3
years Hepatitis B vaccine scaled up nationwide
2011 Pentavalent vaccine (DPT, Hepatitis B, Hib) introduction in phased manner.
However, the birth dose of Hepatitis B and booster dose of DPT vaccines
continued
2013 Second dose of JE vaccine introduced 68
---
Open Vial Policy for vaccines in UIP
e-VIN introduced
2014 India and Southeast Asia Region certified POLIO- FREE
Launch of Mission Indradhanush for low immunization coverage pockets
2015 Pentavalent vaccine expanded to all states
Inactivated Polio Vaccine Introduced in 5 states
India validated for Maternal and Neonatal Tetanus elimination
2016 Rotavirus vaccine introduced in 4 states in Phased manner
tOPV to bOPV Switch (25 April)
Switch to fractional IPV nationwide
2017 MR vaccine introduced through campaign in 9months- 15 years replacing
measles vaccine, followed by its inclusion in NIS
PCV introduced (Phased manner)
Use of adrenaline (intramuscular) at immunization session site by ANM
Intensified Mission Indradhanush (IMI) campaign
2019 Td vaccine introduced replacing TT vaccine
2019 Rotavirus vaccine expanded nationwide
2021 Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine nationwide expansion
COVID-19 vaccine introduced using CoWIN platform
2022 Rota virus vaccine formulation with VVM on Label introduced, which becomes
eligible for Open Vial Policy
2023 Introduction of 3rd dose of fractional IPV at 9-11 months (fIPV 3)
U-WIN introduced, as a pilot in 65 districts and rollout across the country during
Intensified Mission Indradhanush 5.0
Vaccine Preventable Diseases:


Under the UIP, presently vaccines are provided to prevent the following VPDs:
Six Viral diseases:
1. Poliomyelitis
2. Hepatitis B
3. Measles
69
---
4. Rubella
5. Diarrhoea due to Rota virus
6. Japanese Encephalitis
Six bacterial diseases
1. Severe form of childhood Tuberculosis
2. Diphtheria
3. Pertussis
4. Tetanus
5. Haemophilus influenzae Type b related diseases
6. Pneumococcus related diseases



70
---
National Immunization Schedule:

Vaccine Age of Maximum age Dose Route Site
administratio
n
For Pregnant Women
Td-1 As early as 4 wks before 0.5 ml Intra- Upper Arm in
possible EDD* If not muscular Deltoid region
during First received, any
Antenatal visit time before
delivery
Td-2* 4 weeks after Any time after 4 0.5 ml Intra- Upper Arm in
Td-1 wks from Td-1 muscular Deltoid region
Td- Booster If received 2 4 wks before 0.5 ml Intra- Upper Arm in
Td doses EDD* If not muscular Deltoid region
during received, any
pregnancy time before
within the last delivery
3 years
For Infants
BCG $ At birth one year of age, 0.05 ml Intra-dermal LEFT- Upper Arm
before 1st (up to 1 in Deltoid region
birthday month
of age)
0.1ml
(1
month
to 1
year)
Hepatitis B - At birth within 24 hours 0.5 ml Intra- LEFT-Antero-
Birth dose of birth muscular lateral side of mid-
thigh
bOPV-0 At birth within the first 2 drops Oral Mouth
15 days of age
bOPV 1, 2 and At 6, 10 and 14 till 5 years of 2 drops Oral Mouth
3 weeks of age age
Rotavirus At 6, 10 and 14 1 year of age 5 drops Oral Mouth
vaccine 1, 2 weeks of age or 2ml
and 3® as per
vaccine
formula
tions
f-IPV 1, 2 and At 6, 14 weeks 1 year of age 0.1 ml Intra-dermal Upper Arm in
3 and at 9 -11 Deltoid region -
months of age 71
---
RIGHT for fIPV-1 &
fIPV-2
-LEFT for fIPV-3
Pneumococc At 6, 14 weeks 1 year of age 0.5 ml Intra- Antero-lateral side
al Conjugate for primary muscular of mid-thigh
Vaccine doses, and 9-
(PCV) 11 months for
(2 Primary +1 booster dose
booster)
Pentavalent 1,
At 6, 10 and 14 1 year of age 0.5 ml Intra-muscular Antero- lateral side
2 and 3 weeks of age of mid-thigh-LEFT
Measles 9 to 11 months 5 years of age 0.5 ml Sub- Upper arm in
Rubella of age cutaneous Deltoid region -
vaccine (MR) RIGHT
1st dose#
Japanese 9 to 11 months 2 years of age 0.5 ml Killed Vaccine: Killed vaccine:
Encephalitis¥ of age (Killed & live Intra-muscular Antero-lateral side
vaccine) Or of mid-thigh – LEFT
(in selected
districts) Live Or
attenuated Live attenuated
Vaccine: vaccine: Upper arm
Subcutaneous in Deltoid region –
LEFT
Vitamin A (1st 9 months with 5 years of age 1 ml (1 Oral Mouth
dose) MR lakh IU)
1st dose
For Children
bOPV Booster 16 to 23 5 years of age 2 drops Oral Mouth
months
MR 2nd dose# 16 to 23 5 years of age 0.5 ml Sub-cutaneous Upper Arm-RIGHT
months of age
DPT Booster-1 16 to 23 7 years of age 0.5 ml Intra-muscular Antero- lateral side
months of age of mid-thigh–LEFT
JE vaccine 2nd 16 to 23 2 years of age 0.5 ml Killed Vaccine: Killed vaccine:
dose ¥ months of age Intra-muscular Antero-lateral side
(in selected or of mid-thigh –
districts) Live RIGHT
attenuated or
Vaccine: Live attenuated
Subcutaneous vaccine: Upper arm
– LEFT



72
---
INTRADERMAL INTRAMUSCULAR
SUBCUTANEOUS for Hep. B,
for BCG, fIPV Penta, PCV; DPT;
159 for MR, JE (Live) 459 909 Td, JE (Killed)
Dermis (skin)
Subcutaneous
layer
Muscle

Vitamin A (2nd16 to 23 5 years of age 2 ml (2Oral Mouth
to 9th dose) months with lakh IU)
MR 2nd dose,
subsequent
doses at an
interval of 6
months, up to
5 years of age
DPT Booster-2 5 to 6 years of7 years of age 0.5 ml Intra-muscular Upper Arm
age -LEFT



*EDD=Expected Date of delivery

$ BCG vaccine requires reconstitution with diluent which is supplied by the manufacturer
® Rota virus vaccine – Open vial policy is applicable to RVV with VVM on the label; Not
applicable to RVV with VVM on the cap
# MR vaccine requires reconstitution with diluent which is supplied by the manufacturer 73
---
¥ JE Vaccine is provided in select districts in India. Live JE vaccine requires reconstitution
with diluent which is supplied by the manufacturer.
Important Definitions related to Immunization


Full Immunization: Child who has received BCG, 3 doses of OPV, 3 doses of
pentavalent and 1 dose of MR by first year of age. This is the historical definition used
for survey and evaluation purposes and hence has been continued. - Full
Immunization coverage (FIC)
FIC plus: Child who has received all the vaccines given in the Universal Immunization
Programme (UIP) by one year of age.
Complete Immunization: Child who has received all the vaccines given in the
Universal Immunization Programme (UIP) by two years of age.
Left-out: Child who has not received any vaccine under UIP (unimmunized).
Drop-out: Child who has received one or more UIP vaccine/s but did not complete the
schedule as per the age (partially immunized).
Zero-dose (operational & reporting purpose): Child who has not received first dose
of pentavalent vaccine by one year of age.



74
---
2
2

Immunization Cold-Chain Supply System


Network and different levels of Immunization Supply Chain (ISC) in
India

The immunization supply chain encompasses all the people, activities, infrastructure,
resources and planning necessary to ensure that vaccines stay safe and effective when they
reach the children who need them.1 It is a system of storing and transporting vaccines at the
recommended temperature starting from point of manufacture to the point of use. Strong
supply chains is an essential prerequisite to an effective immunization program. ISC ensures
that the right vaccine is always available in the right quantity at the right place and is stored,
distributed in the right conditions.
India has a four-tiered Immunization Supply Chain:
a. Primary (PR) Stores: Includes cold-chain stores which receive vaccines directly from
manufacturer. In India, the primary stores include 4 Government Medical Store Depot
(GMSD) and 37 State Vaccine Stores. Few regional vaccine stores of bigger states also
receive vaccines directly from the manufacturers.
b. Sub-National (SN) Stores: These stores include regional vaccine stores which receive
vaccines from primary stores, and further supply vaccines to the lowest distribution stores.
There are 118 regional vaccine stores in India.
c. Lowest Distribution (LD) Stores: Lowest distribution stores are the District Vaccine
Stores (DVS) which supply vaccines to the last cold-chain points. There are 745* functional
DVS in India.
d. Service Delivery Points (SP) Stores: These are 30,231* last cold-chain points also
known as SP stores which supply vaccines to the fixed and outreach session sites. Service
delivery points or last cold-chain points are located in PHC/CHC/UPHC/District hospital and
Medical College, etc.
*Data as on 20 March 2024



75
---
Journey of vaccine from point of manufacture to the beneficiary

Cold Chain is a system of storing and transporting vaccines at recommended temperatures
from the point of manufacture to the point of use. A vaccine once manufactured is supplied
to the beneficiary within the recommended temperature range to maintain its potency. The
vaccines are supplied in tertiary boxes (usually a thermocol box) which usually contain
secondary packaging (cardboard box/plastic packing) of vaccines. The vaccines are supplied
to the primary stores (GMSD, state or regional vaccine stores) by the manufacturer usually
by air or road route. In India, usually 80% of the annual supply is made directly to the primary
stores. Approximately twenty percent of the annual supply is stored at the GMSD as buffer.
From the primary store, the vaccines are transported to the lower stores through insulated
trucks/vans or refrigerated vaccine van or trucks.
Last cold-chain (ILR) points, store vaccines and supply them to the session sites in vaccine
carrier through Alternate Vaccine Delivery (AVD) systems.
Immunization cold-chain supply system

7ep
Vaccine pnman Store Refrigerated State Store Insulated Van
Transport (GMSD {State) Insulated
Beneficiary Session Sites Vaccine Primary Health Insulated Van District Vaccine
Carrier Centre to 8FC) Store
All Vaccines in
Key elements of cold chain

The key elements of the cold-chain are:
• Personnel: to manage vaccine storage and distribution at each level
• Equipment: to store and transport vaccine and monitor their storage temperature



76
---
• Procedures: to ensure correct utilization of equipment and ensure vaccines are stored
and transported safely.
Overview of cold-chain equipment

COLD CHAIN EQUIPMENT
STORAGE TRANSPORTATION ASSOCIATED TEMPERATURE
EQUIPMENT MONITORINGDEVICES
ELECTRICAL HoM-
ELECTRICAL
REFRIGERATED VAN STABILIZER THERMOMETER
Wic SOLAR COLD BOX INSUIATED VAN GENERATOR ELECTRONIC
REFRIGE- VACCINE COLDBOX INVERTER DATA LOGGER
CARRIER VACCINE CARRIER FREEZE INDICATOR
RATOR ICE-PACAS REALTIME TEMP
MONITORING
DEVICE
Technical specifications of cold-chain equipment

Equipment Temperature Storage Capacity Holdover time
Electrical
Deep Freezer (Large) -15°C to -25°C Ice pack preparation At 43°C for 2 hrs 30
At DVS & above levels for mins (minimum)
OPV/Freeze dried vaccine
storage (180 to 250 litres)
Deep Freezer (Small) -15°C to -25°C Ice packs preparation & storage At 43°C for 2 hrs 30
(105 to 125 litres) mins (minimum)
ILR (Large) +2°C to +8°C All Vaccine storage (180 to 250 At 43°C for 24 hrs
litres) (minimum)
ILR (Small) +2°C to +8°C All vaccines storage (80-130 At 43°C for 20 hrs
litres) (minimum)
Non-electrical
Cold Box (Large) +2°C to +8°C All vaccines stored for transport, At 43°C for 96 hrs*
during defrosting of ILR or in
case of power failure (20 to 25
litres)
Cold Box (Small) +2°C to +8°C All vaccines stored for transport, At 43°C for 48 hrs*
during defrosting of ILR or in
case of power failure (5 to 8
litres) 77
---
Vaccine carrier (1.7 +2°C to +8°C All vaccines carried to At 43°C for 36 Hrs *
litres) immunization session/ local
transport of vaccines (max for
12 hours)(4 conditioned Ice
packs & 16-20 vials)



Source: RI Module for Medical Officer / Health workers – 2024

NHM/MoHFW



78
---
8
3

Mission Indhradhanush


Mission Indradhanush (MI) was launched by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(MoHFW) on 25th December 2014.
It is a special catch-up campaign under the Universal Immunization Program (UIP),
conducted in the areas of low immunization coverage to vaccinate all the children and
pregnant women left out or dropped out from Routine Immunization. The initiative's
mammoth task is being fulfilled with the support of an integrated and committed task-force,
ensuring full immunization coverage.
Objective


The Mission Indradhanush aims to cover all those children who are either unvaccinated, or
are partially vaccinated against vaccine preventable diseases. India’s Universal
Immunization Programme (UIP) provide free vaccines against 12 life threatening diseases, to
26 million children annually. The Universal Immunization Programme provides life-saving
vaccines to all children across the country free of cost to protect them against Tuberculosis,
Diphtheria, Pertussis, Tetanus, Polio, Hepatitis B, Pneumonia and Meningitis due to
Hemophilus Influenzae type B (Hib), Measles, Rubella, Japanese Encephalitis (JE) and
Rotavirus diarrhea. (Rubella, JE and Rotavirus vaccine in select states and districts).
Implementation


Focused and systematic immunization drive will be through a “catch-up” campaign mode
where the aim is to cover all the children who have been left out or missed out for
immunization. Also, the pregnant women are administered the tetanus vaccine, ORS
packets and zinc tablets are distributed for use in the event of severe diarrhea or dehydration
and vitamin A doses are administered to boost child immunity.



Mission Indradhanush Phase I was started as a weeklong special intensified immunization
drive from 7th April 2015 in 201 high focus districts for four consecutive months. During this
phase, more than 75 lakh children were vaccinated of which 20 lakh children were fully
vaccinated and more than 20 lakh pregnant women received tetanus toxoid vaccine.
79
---
The Phase II of Mission Indradhanush covered 352 districts in the country of which 279 are
medium focus districts and remaining 73 are high focus districts of Phase-I. During Phase II
of Mission Indradhanush, four special drives of weeklong duration were conducted starting
from October 2015.
Phases I and II of the special drive had 1.48 crore children and 38 lakh pregnant women
additionally immunized. Of these nearly 39 lakh children and more than 20 lakh pregnant
women have been additionally fully immunized. Across 21.3 lakh sessions held through the
country in high and mid-priority districts, more than 3.66 crore antigens have been
administered.
Phase III of Mission Indradhanush was launched from 7 April 2016 covering 216 districts.
Four intensified immunization rounds were conducted for seven days in each between April
and July 2016, in these districts. These 216 districts have been identified on the basis of
estimates where full immunization coverage is less than 60 per cent and have high dropout
rates. Apart from the standard of children under 2, it also focused on 5-year-olds and on
increasing DPT booster coverage, and giving tetanus toxoid injections to pregnant women.
Overall, in the first three phases, 28.7 lakh immunization sessions were conducted, covering
2.1 crore children, of which 55 lakhs were fully immunized. Also, 55.9 lakh pregnant women
were given the tetanus toxoid vaccine across 497 high-focus districts. Since the launch of
Mission Indhradhanush, full immunization coverage has increased by 5 per cent to 7 per cent.
Mission Indradhanush has resulted in a 6.7 % annual expansion in the immunization cover.
Phase IV of Mission Indradhanush was launched from 7 February 2017 covering the North-
eastern states of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Sikkim and Tripura. It has been rolled out in rest of the country during April 2017.
The four phases of Mission Indradhanush have reached to more than 2.53 crore children and
68 lakh pregnant women with life-saving vaccines.
The fifth phase of Mission Indradhanush was carried out in 190 lowest performing districts.
At the end of six phases of Mission Indradhanush, 554 districts across the country were
covered. A survey (IMI- CES) carried out in 190 districts covered in Intensified Mission
Indradhanush (5th phase of Mission Indradhanush) shows 18.5% points increase in full
immunization coverage as compared to NFHS-4.
80
---
On completion of seven phases (from April 2015 to March 2020), 690 districts wherein 3.76
crore children were reached and 94.6 lakh pregnant females were immunized. As of April
2021, during the various phases of Mission Indradhanush, a total of 3.86 crore children and
96.8 lakh pregnant women have been vaccinated. As of January 2022, ten phases of Mission
Indradhanush have been completed covering 701 districts across the country. As of October
2023, 12 phases have been completed and a total of 5.06 crore children and 1.25 crore
pregnant women have been cumulatively vaccinated under the campaign.
The Ministry is being technically supported by WHO, UNICEF, Rotary International and other
donor partners. Mass media, interpersonal communication, and sturdy mechanisms of
monitoring and evaluating the scheme are crucial components of Mission Indradhanush.
Areas Under Focus


The following areas are targeted through special immunization campaigns:
• High risk areas identified by the polio eradication programme. These include
populations living in areas such as:
• Urban slums with migration
• Nomads
• Brick kilns
• Construction sites
• Other migrants (fisherman villages, riverine areas with shifting populations etc.) and
• Underserved and hard to reach populations (forested and tribal populations etc.)
• Areas with low routine immunization (RI) coverage (pockets with Measles/vaccine
preventable disease (VPD) outbreaks).
• Areas with vacant sub-centers: No ANM posted for more than three months.
• Areas with missed Routine Immunization (RI) sessions: ANMs on long leave and
similar reasons
• Small villages, hamlets, dhanis or purbas clubbed with another village for RI sessions
and not having independent RI sessions.
Mission Indhradhanush - Districts covered
Phase V - All districts across the country
Phase V - 190 low performing districts 81
---
Phase IV - The fourth phase of Mission Indradhanush covered North-eastern states -
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura
from 7th February 2017. It was rolled out in rest of the country in April 2017.
Phase III - 216 districts
Phase II - 352 districts
Phase I - 201 districts
Strategy for Mission Indradhanush


Mission Indradhanush will be a national immunization drive to strengthen the key functional
areas of immunization for ensuring high coverage throughout the country with special
attention to districts with low immunization coverage.
The broad strategy, based on evidence and best practices, will include four basic elements-
Meticulous planning of campaigns/sessions at all levels: Ensure revision of micro plans in all
blocks and urban areas in each district to ensure availability of sufficient vaccinators and all
vaccines during routine immunization sessions. Develop special plans to reach the
unreached children in more than 400,000 high risk settlements such as urban slums,
construction sites, brick kilns, nomadic sites and hard-to-reach areas.
Effective communication and social mobilization efforts: Generate awareness and demand
for immunization services through need-based communication strategies and social
mobilization activities to enhance participation of the community in the routine immunization
programme through mass media, mid media, interpersonal communication (IPC), school
and youth networks and corporates.
Intensive training of the health officials and frontline workers: Build the capacity of health
officials and workers in routine immunization activities for quality immunization services.
Establish accountability framework through task forces: Enhance involvement and
accountability/ownership of the district administrative and health machinery by
strengthening the district task forces for immunization in all districts of India and ensuring the
use of concurrent session monitoring data to plug the gaps in implementation on a real time
basis.



82
---
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare will establish collaboration with other Ministries,
ongoing programmes and international partners to promote a coordinated and synergistic
approach to improve routine immunization coverage in the country.
Intensified Mission Indradhanush (IMI)


The Intensified Mission Indradhanush (IMI) has been launched by the Government of India to
reach each and every child under two years of age and all those pregnant women who have
been left uncovered under the routine immunization programme. The special drive focuses
on improving immunization coverage in select districts and cities to ensure full immunization
to more than 90% by December 2018.
With a sharpened focus on high priority districts and urban areas, under IMI, four consecutive
immunization rounds were conducted for 7 days in 173 districts - 121 districts and 17 cities
in 16 states and 52 districts in 8 north eastern states - every month between October 2017
and January 2018. Intensified Mission Indradhanush covers low performing areas in the
selected districts and urban areas. These areas have been selected through triangulation of
data available under national surveys, Health Management Information System data and
World Health Organization concurrent monitoring data. Special attention will be given to
unserved/low coverage pockets in sub-center and urban slums with migratory population.
The focus is also on the urban settlements and cities identified under National Urban Health
Mission (NUHM).
Intensified Mission Indradhanush will have inter-ministerial and inter-departmental
coordination, action- based review mechanism and intensified monitoring and
accountability framework for effective implementation of targeted rapid interventions to
improve the routine immunization coverage. IMI is supported by 11 other ministries and
departments, such as Ministry of Women and Child Development, Panchayati Raj, Ministry
of Urban Development, Ministry of Youth Affairs among others. The convergence of ground
level workers of various departments like ASHA, ANMs, Anganwadi workers, Zila preraks
under National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM), self-help groups will be ensured for better
coordination and effective implementation of the programme.
Intensified Mission Indradhanush would be closely monitored at the district, state and central
level at regular intervals. Further, it would be reviewed by the Cabinet Secretary at the



83
---
National level and will continue to be monitored at the highest level under a special initiative
‘Proactive Governance and Timely Implementation (PRAGATI)’.
This Intensified Mission is driven based on the information received from gap assessment,
supervision through government, concurrent monitoring by partners, and end-line surveys.
Under IMI, special strategies are devised for rigorous monitoring of the programme. States
and districts have developed coverage improvement plans based on gap self-assessment.
These plans are reviewed from state to central level with an aim to reach 90% coverage by
December 2018.
An appreciation and awards mechanism are also conceived to recognize the districts
reaching more than 90% coverage. The criteria include best practices and media
management during crisis. To acknowledge the contribution of the partners/Civil Society
Organization (CSOs) and others, Certificate of Appreciation will be given.



Source: Operational Guidelines of Mission Indradhanush / Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare/NHM



84
---
44

Pulse Polio Programme


With the global initiative of eradication of polio in 1988 following World Health Assembly
resolution in 1988, Pulse Polio Immunization programme was launched in India in 1995.
Children in the age group of 0-5 years administered polio drops during National and Sub-
national immunization rounds (in high-riskareas) every year. Around 17.4 crore children of less
than five years across the country are given polio drops as part of the drive of Government of
India to sustain polio eradication from the country.
The last polio case in the country was reported from Howrah district of West Bengal with date
of onset 13th January 2011. Thereafter no polio case has been reported in the country. WHO
on 24th February 2012 removed India from the list of countries with active endemic wild
polio virus transmission.
Objective
The Pulse Polio Initiative was started with an objective of achieving hundred per cent
coverage under Oral Polio Vaccine. It aimed to immunize children through improved social
mobilization, plan mop-up operations in areas where poliovirus has almost disappeared and
maintain high level of morale among the public.
Steps taken by the Government to maintain polio free status in India
Maintaining community immunity through high quality National and Sub National polio rounds
each year.
An extremely high level of vigilance through surveillance across the country for any
importation or circulation of poliovirus and VDPV is being maintained. Environmental
surveillance (sewage sampling) has been established to detect poliovirus transmission and
as a surrogate indicator of the progress as well for any programmatic interventions
strategically in Mumbai, Delhi, Patna, Kolkata Punjab and Gujarat.
All States and Union Territories in the country have developed a Rapid Response Team (RRT)
to respond to any polio outbreak in the country. An Emergency Preparedness and Response
Plan (EPRP) has also been developed by all States indicating steps to be undertaken in
case of detection of a polio case.
85
---
To reduce risk of importation from neighboring countries, international border vaccination is
being provided through continuous vaccination teams (CVT) to all eligible children round the
clock. These are provided through special booths set up at the international borders that India
shares with Pakistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan Nepal and Myanmar.
Source: Pulse Polio Programme / Ministry of Health and Family Welfare / NHM



86
---
55

eVIN


The Electronic Vaccine Intelligence Network (eVIN) is a smartphone and cloud-based app
that helps the Government of India's Universal Immunization Programme by providing real-
time information on vaccine stocks, temperatures, and flows:
Purpose


eVIN's goal is to ensure that safe and potent vaccines are available to the right people in a
timely manner.
Features


eVIN includes a mobile app that allows cold chain handlers to report data on vaccine stocks,
consumption, and movement. It also has a SIM-enabled temperature logger for remotely
monitoring vaccine storage temperatures.
Benefits


eVIN has helped to:
Increase vaccine availability rates to over 99% at all cold chain points
•
Reduce vaccine stock-outs by over 80%
•
Streamline cold chain points and vaccine flow
•
Standardize and digitize vaccine registers
•



Development


The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) supported the development and
implementation of eVIN.
Source: eVIN guidelines



87
---
66

UWIN


About U-WIN

• India’s Universal Immunization Programme (UIP) is a part of the Reproductive and
Child Health (RCH) Program under National Health Mission (NHM).



• It is one of the largest public health programs in the world under which vaccination is
being provided free of cost to all pregnant women & children.



• Vaccination can be availed against 12 vaccine preventable diseases: nationally
against 11 diseases- Diphtheria, Pertussis, Tetanus, Polio, Measles, Rubella, severe
form of childhood Tuberculosis, Rotavirus Diarrhoea, Hepatitis B, Meningitis &
Pneumonia caused by Hemophilus Influenza Type B and Pneumococcal Pneumonia
and sub-nationally against 1 Disease - Japanese Encephalitis (JE vaccine is provided
only in endemic districts).



• U-WIN platform captures each & every vaccination event of all pregnant women &
children under Universal Immunization Programme (UIP).



Get Vaccinated in 3 Easy Steps


1. Scheduled Appointment
2. Get Vaccination
3. Immunization details.



Source: https://uwin.mohfw.gov.in/home



88
---
ADOLESCENT

HEALTH



89
---
11

Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram (RKSK)


The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has launched a health programme for adolescents, in
the age group of 10-19 years, which would target their nutrition, reproductive health and
substance abuse, among other issues.
The Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram was launched on 7th January, 2014. The key
principle of this programme is adolescent participation and leadership, Equity and inclusion,
Gender Equity and strategic partnerships with other sectors and stakeholders. The
programme envisions enabling all adolescents in India to realize their full potential by making
informed and responsible decisions related to their health and well- being and by accessing
the services and support they need to do so.
To guide the implementation of this programme, MOHFW in collaboration with UNFPA has
developed a National Adolescent Health Strategy. It realigns the existing clinic-based
curative approach to focus on a more holistic model based on a continuum of care for
adolescent health and developmental needs.
The Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram (National Adolescent Health Programme), will
comprehensively address the health needs of the 243 million adolescents. It introduces
community-based interventions through peer educators, and is underpinned by
collaborations with other ministries and state governments.
The Vision


The strategy envisions that all adolescents in India are able to realise their full potential by
making informed and responsible decisions related to their health and well-being, and by
accessing the services and support they need to do so. The implementation of this vision
requires support from the government and other institutions, including the health, education
and labour sectors as well as adolescents’ own families and communities.
Building an agenda for adolescent health requires an escalation in the visibility of young
people and an understanding of the challenges to their health and development. It needs
implementation of approaches that will ensure a successful transition to adulthood. This



90
---
requires that the multi-dimensional health needs and special concerns of adolescents are
understood and addressed in national policies and a range of programmes at different levels.
Objectives


• Improve nutrition
• Reduce the prevalence of malnutrition among adolescent girls and boys
• Reduce the prevalence of iron-deficiency anaemia (IDA) among adolescent girls and
boys
• Improve sexual and reproductive health
• Improve knowledge, attitudes and behaviour, in relation to SRH
• Reduce teenage pregnancies
• Improve birth preparedness, complication readiness and provide early
parenting support for adolescent parents
• Enhance mental health
• Address mental health concerns of adolescents
• Prevent injuries and violence
• Promote favourable attitudes for preventing injuries and violence
(including GBV) among adolescents
• Prevent substance misuse
• Increase adolescents’ awareness of the adverse effects and consequences of
substance misuse
• Address NCDs
• Promote behaviour change in adolescents to prevent NCDs such as hypertension,
stroke, cardio- vascular diseases and diabetes
Target Groups


The new adolescent health (AH) strategy focuses on age groups 10-14 years and 15-19 years
with universal coverage, i.e. males and females; urban and rural; in school and out of school;
married and unmarried; and vulnerable and under-served.
Strategies


• Strategies/interventions to achieve objectives can be broadly grouped as:
• Community based interventions 91
---
• Peer Education (PE)
• Quarterly Adolescent Health Day (AHD)
• Weekly Iron and Folic Acid Supplementation Programme (WIFS)
• Menstrual Hygiene Scheme (MHS)
• Facility based interventions
• Strengthening of Adolescent Friendly Health Clinics (AFHC)
• Convergence
• Within Health & Family Welfare - FP, MH (incl VHND), RBSK, NACP, National Tobacco
Control Programme, National Mental Health Programme, NCDs and IEC
• With other departments/schemes - WCD (ICDS, KSY, BSY, SABLA), HRD (AEP,
MDM), Youth Affairs and Sports (Adolescent Empowerment Scheme, National
Service Scheme, NYKS, NPYAD)
• Social and Behaviour Change Communication with focus on Inter Personal
Communication



Source: Operational Guidelines of RKSK / National Health Mission



92
---
2
2

Adolescent Friendly Health Clinics (AFHCs)


Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram (RKSK) highlights the need for strengthening
Adolescent Friendly Health Clinics (AFHC) under its facility based approach. This approach
was initiated in 2006 under RCH II in the form of Adolescent Reproductive Sexual Health
(ARSH) Clinic to provide counselling on sexual & reproductive health issues.
Now under RKSK, AFHC entails a whole gamut of clinical and counselling services on diverse
adolescent health issues ranging from Sexual and Reproductive Health (SRH) to Nutrition,
Substance abuse, Injuries and Violence (including Gender based violence, Non
Communicable Diseases and Mental Health. Adolescent Friendly Health Services are
delivered through trained service providers- MO, ANM and Counsellors at AFHCs located at
Primary Health Centers (PHCs), Community Health Centers (CHCs) and District Hospitals
(DHs) and Medical Colleges
The key ‘friendly’ component of AFHC mandates facility-based clinical and counselling
services for adolescents, which are:
o Equitable—services are provided to all adolescents who need them.
o Accessible—ready accessibility to AFHCs by adolescents i.e. AFHC should be
established where adolescents can go without hesitation for example: it should not
be placed near labour rooms, integrated counselling and treatment centres, Sexual
and Reproductive Transmitted Infections (STI/RTI) centre etc.
o Acceptable—health providers meet the expectation of adolescents who use the
services.
o Appropriate—the required care is provided and any unnecessary and harmful
practices are avoided.
o Effective—healthcare produces positive change in the status of the adolescents;
services are efficient and have high quality. The right health services are provided in
the right way, and make a positive contribution to their health.
o Comprehensive—care provision covers promotive, preventive and curative aspects. 93
---
Benchmark for AFHC

o Infrastructure- clean, bright and colorful
o Can be easily accessed by the adolescents (distance and convenient working hours)
o Awareness about the clinic and range of service it provides (IEC, Proper Sinages)
o Non judgmental and competent health service providers
o Maintains privacy and confidentiality
o Community members are aware of the services provided and understand the need of
the same.
o Referral from the periphery/community and further referral linkages with the higher
facilities and specialty clinics.
Adolescent Friendly Health Clinics (AFHCs) at District level will be designated as Adolescent
Health Resource Centre (A-HRC). These centres apart from providing the full complement
of services envisioned for AFHC will also act as resource centre for capacity building of
health care providers and repository for Information, Education and Communication
materials on Adolescent Health such as posters, banners, pamphlets, audio-video
materials.
Counselors play a crucial role in operationalizing Adolescent Friendly Health Clinics
(AFHCs). They Inform, educate and counsel clients on Adolescent Health issues and refer
clients to health facilities, or other service delivery points such as Integrated Counselling
Testing Centre (ICTC), de-addiction centre, Non-Communicable Diseases clinics etc.
Besides this, outreach services by counsellors are carried out at schools, colleges, youth
clubs and in the community at least twice a week to sensitize the adolescents, caregivers
and influencers on various adolescent health issues and apprise them of various available
adolescent-friendly health services.
It is important to recognise that AFHCs are part of a wider package of adolescent health
services. Adolescent-friendly health Clinics will have strong linkages with the Peer
Education Programme. Adolescent Health Day and Adolescent Friendly Clubs will work as a
platform for referring clients to the Adolescent-friendly health Clinics.
Source: Adolescent Friendly Health Clinics (AFHCs) / NHM
94
---
38
3

Weekly Iron Folic Acid Supplementation


The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has launched the Weekly Iron and Folic Acid
Supplementation (WIFS) Programme to meet the challenge of high prevalence and incidence
of anaemia amongst adolescent girls and boys. WIFS is evidence based programmatic
response to the prevailing anaemia situation amongst adolescent girls and boys through
supervised weekly ingestion of IFA supplementation and biannual helminthic control. The
long term goal is to break the intergenerational cycle of anaemia, the short term benefits is
of a nutritionally improved human capital. The programme, implemented across the country
both in rural and urban areas.
Salient features of WIFS


Objective of Weekly Iron Folic acid Supplementation (WIFS) To reduce the prevalence and
severity of anaemia in adolescent population (10-19 years).
Target groups


o School going adolescent girls and boys in 6th to 12th class enrolled in
government/government aided/municipal schools.
o Out of school adolescent girls.
Intervention


o Administration of supervised Weekly Iron-folic Acid Supplements of 100mg
elemental iron and 500ug Folic acid using a fixed day approach.
o Screening of target groups for moderate/severe anaemia and referring these cases to
an appropriate health facility.
o Biannual de-worming (Albendazole 400mg), six months apart, for control of
helminthic infestation.
o Information and counselling for improving dietary intake and for taking actions for
prevention of intestinal worm infestation.



95
---
Convergence

Convergence with key stakeholder ministries like the Ministry of Women and Child
Development and Ministry of Human Resource Development is an essential part of
implantation plan of the WIFS programme. Key convergent areas include: joint programme
planning, capacity building of nodal service providers including Medical Officers, Anganwadi
Worker (AWW) Staff Nurses, School teachers, monitoring and a comprehensive
communication component.
Source: Weekly Iron Folic Acid Supplementation / NHM



96
---
4
4

Menstrual Hygiene Scheme


Background

The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has introduced a scheme for promotion of
menstrual hygiene among adolescent girls in the age group of 10-19 year in rural areas.
The major objectives of the scheme


o To increase awareness among adolescent girls on Menstrual Hygiene
o To increase access to and use of high quality sanitary napkins to adolescent girls in
rural areas.
o To ensure safe disposal of Sanitary Napkins in an environmentally friendly manner.
The scheme was initially implemented in 2011 in 107 selected districts in 17 States wherein
a pack of six sanitary napkins called “Freedays” was provided to rural adolescent girls for Rs.
6. From 2014 onwards, funds are now being provided to States/UTs under National Health
Mission for decentralized procurement of sanitary napkins packs for provision to rural
adolescent girls at a subsidized rate of Rs 6 for a pack of 6 napkins. The ASHA will continue
to be responsible for distribution, receiving an incentive @ Rs 1 per pack sold and a free pack
of napkins every month for her own personal use. She will convene monthly meetings at the
Aanganwadi Centres or other such platforms for adolescent girls to focus on issue of
menstrual hygiene and also serve as a platform to discuss other relevant SRH issues. A range
of IEC material has been developed around MHS, using a 360 degree approach to create
awareness among adolescent girls about safe & hygienic menstrual health practices which
includes audio, video and reading materials for adolescent girls and job-aids for ASHAs and
other field level functionaries for communicating with adolescent girls.



Source: Operational guidelines for Menstrual Hygiene Scheme / NHM



97
---
5
5

Adolescent Health and Wellness Day


It is one of the interventions under RKSK to improve coverage with preventive and promotive
interventions for adolescents and to increase awareness among adolescents, parents,
families, and stakeholders about issues and needs related to adolescent health.
Objectives


1. To increase awareness among adolescents and stakeholders about the determinants
of adolescent health such as nutrition, sexual and reproductive health, mental health,
injuries and violence (Including Gender-Based Violence), substance misuse, and
Non-Communicable Diseases.
2. To improve awareness of other adolescent health-related services in particular Nayi
Disha Kendra/ helplines.
3. To increase awareness of parents and other key stakeholders on adolescent health
needs.
4. To address concerns of adolescents regarding sexual and reproductive health,
mental health, injuries, violence, substance misuse, and Non-Communicable
Diseases.
Source: Adolescent Health and Wellness Day / NHM



98
---
6
6

Peer Education Program


Background

The adolescents in the community are covered through Peer Education (PE) Programme. The
selected Peer Educators called Saathiya ensure that adolescents benefit from regular and
sustained peer education covering all six themes of RKSK.
It is envisaged that this approach would facilitate the coverage of out of school adolescents
in addition to the school going adolescents. The states may consider the districts with high
proportion of out-of-school adolescents through this intervention.
Under the PE programme, four peer educators (two boys and two girls) are selected per
village/1000 population/ASHA habitation to reach out to adolescents. Saathiya selection is
facilitated by ASHA in consultation with Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committee.
Each Saathiya forms a group of 15-20 boys or girls from their community and conducts
weekly one to two hour participatory sessions using PE kits. Saathiya also maintains a diary,
including a brief overview of each session and the number of participants. They will sensitize
e adolescents towards their health and inform them about existing adolescent friendly health
services, so that all the adolescents may optimally utilize it.
Saathiya facilitates the organization of the quarterly Adolescent Health Days (AHD) and
participate in the Adolescent Friendly Club (AFC) meetings also.
ASHA acts as the village level Saathiya coordinator and takes the lead in ensuring that the
peer education activities are carried out smoothly at the village level. ANMs and Male Health
Workers moderate the monthly AFC sessions and Medical Officer In-charge and Block
Adolescent Health Coordinators provide the oversight.
Adolscent health days


The Quarterly Adolescent Health Day (AHD) is one of the interventions under RKSK to
improve coverage with preventive and promotive interventions for adolescents and to
increase awareness among adolescents, parents, families and stakeholders about issues
and needs related to adolescent health. AHDs are conducted at the village level at
Anganwadi Centres or any other public place where adolescents and all stakeholders have 99
---
easy accessibility. Block adolescent health coordinator is the focal person to coordinate for
AHD, ensuring availability of commodities and services and ensure that publicity is done
before hand. ASHAs engage with parents and families of adolescents to increase awareness
about the unique needs of adolescents.
Adolescent Friendly Club Meetings


Apart from above, Adolescent Friendly Club (AFC) meetings are also organized once a
month at sub-centre level under the overall guidance of ANM. These typically cover 5
villages/5000 population composed of 10-20 Saathiya each. During meetings, Saathiya from
different villages meet and clarify issues which they have encountered during their weekly
sessions with the help of ANM.
Source: Operational guidelines for Peer Education Programme / www.nhm.gov.in



100
---
77

School Health and Wellness Program


The School Health Programme has been incorporated as a part of the Health and Wellness
component of the Ayushman Bharat Programme of the Government of India to strengthen
the preventive and promotive aspects through health promotion activities. It is a joint
initiative of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and NCERT.
The programme was started with the objective of providing age-appropriate information
about health and nutrition to the children in schools and promoting healthy behaviors among
the children that they will inculcate for life.
Two teachers, preferably one male and one female, in every school designated as “Health
and Wellness Ambassadors” were trained to transact health promotion and disease
prevention information in the form of interesting activities for one hour every week. These
health promotion messages have bearing on improving health practices in the state as
students will act as Health and Wellness Messengers in the society.
Objectives


• To provide age appropriate information about health and nutrition to the children in
schools.
• To promote healthy behaviors among the children that they will inculcate for life.
• To detect and treat diseases early in children and adolescents including identification
of malnourished and anemic children with appropriate referrals to PHCs and
hospitals.
• To promote use of safe drinking water in schools
• To promote safe menstrual hygiene practices by girls
• To promote yoga and meditation through Health & Wellness Ambassadors.
• To encourage research on health, wellness and nutrition for children.
Package of Services under School Health


School Health Promotion Activities
• Age appropriate incremental learning for promotion of healthy behavior and
prevention of various diseases 101
---
• Delivered through school teachers/Health and Wellness Ambassadors trained in
each school
Health Screening
• The screening of children for 30 identified health conditions for early detection, free
treatment and management through dedicated RBSK mobile health teams
Provision of Services
• Provision of IFA and Albendazole tablets by teachers through WIFS and NDD
programme respectively.
• Provison of sanitary napkins
• Age appropriate vaccination
Electronic Health Records
• Electronic health record for each child
Imparting skills of emergency care
• Training of teachers on basic first aid
Operationalization of the School Health Programme


The Programme has been developed based on the learning and experiences from a variety of
global and national school based interventions. Two teachers, preferably one male and one
female, in every school designated as “Health and Wellness Ambassadors” will be trained
to transact health promotion and disease prevention information in the form of interesting
activities for one hour every week. These health promotion messages will also have bearing
on improving health practices in the country as students will act as Health and Wellness
Messengers in the society. Every Tuesday may be dedicated as Health and Wellness Day in
the schools.



Source: Guidelines for School Health and Wellness Programme / NHM



102
---
FAMILY

WELFARE



103
---
11

National Family Welfare Programme


India was the first country in the world to have launched a National Programme for Family
Planning in 1952. Over the decades, the programme has undergone transformation in terms
of policy and actual programme implementation and currently being repositioned to not only
achieve population stabilization goals but also promote reproductive health and
reduce maternal, infant & child mortality and morbidity.
The objectives, strategies and activities of the Family Planning division are designed and
operated towards achieving the family welfare goals and objectives stated in various policy
documents (NPP: National Population Policy 2000, NHP: National Health Policy 2017, and
NHM: National Rural Health Mission) and to honour the commitments of the Government of
India (including ICPD: International Conference on Population and Development, MDG:
Millennium Development Goals, SDG: Sustainable Development Goals, and others).
Factors influencing population growth
Unmet need of Family Planning: This includes the currently married women, who wish to
stop child bearing or wait for next two or more years for the next child birth, but not using any
contraceptive method. Total unmet need of Family Planning is 9.4 (NFHS-V) in our country.
Age at Marriage and first childbirth: In India 23.3% (NFHS-V)of the girls get married below
the age of 18 years and out of the total deliveries 6.8% are among teenagers i.e. 15-19 years.
The situation regarding age of girls at marriage is more alarming in few states like, Bihar
(40.8%), Rajasthan (25.4.%), Jharkhand (32.2%), UP (15.8%), and MP (23.1%). Delaying the
age at marriage and first child birth could reduce the impact of Population Momentum on
population growth.
Spacing between Births: Healthy spacing of 3 years improves the chances of survival of
infants and also helps in reducing the impact of population momentum on population
growth. SRS 2020 data shows that In India, spacing between two childbirths is less than the
recommended period of 3 years in 47.6% of births.
The public sector provides the following contraceptive methods at various levels of health
system:
104
---
Spacing Methods Limiting Methods
IUCD 380 A and Cu IUCD 375 Female Sterilization:
Injectable Contraceptive MPA (Antara Programme) Laparoscopic
Combined Oral Contraceptive (Mala-N) Minilap
Centchroman (Chhaya) Male Sterilization:
No Scalpel Vasectomy
Condoms (Nirodh) Conventional Vasectomy
EMERGENCY CONTRACEPTION
Emergency Contraceptive pills (Ezy pills)



Above services are provided at various levels of public sector facilities; following table
provides details of the same:
Family Planning Method Service Provider Service Location
SPACING METHODS
IUCD 380 A, IUCD 375 Trained & certified ANMs, Sub centre & higher
LHVs, SNs and doctors levels
Injectable Contraceptive MPA Trained ANMs, SNs and Sub centre & higher
(Antara Programme) doctors levels
Oral Contraceptive Pills Trained ASHAs, ANMs, LHVs, Village level Sub
(OCPs) SNs and doctors centre & higher levels
Condoms Trained ASHAs, ANMs, LHVs, Village level Sub
SNs and doctors centre & higher levels
EMERGENCY CONTRACEPTION
Emergency Contraceptive Pills Trained ASHAs, ANMs, LHVs, Village level Sub
(ECPs) SNs and doctors centre & higher levels 105
---
LIMITING METHODS
Minilap Trained & certified MBBS PHC & higher levels
doctors & Specialist Doctors
Laparoscopic Sterilization Trained & certified MBBS Usually CHC & higher
doctors & Specialist Doctors levels
NSV: No Scalpel Vasectomy Trained & certified MBBS PHC & higher levels
doctors & Specialist Doctors



• Mission Parivar Vikas was initially for 146 high priority districts in the 7 high focus
states (Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan &
Jharkhand), is scaled up in all districts of the seven high focus states as well as six
north-estern states of the country with an aim to ensure availability of contraceptive
products to the clients at all the levels of Health Systems.
• Providing more choices through newly introduced contraceptives : Injectable
Contraceptive MPA (Antara Programme) and Centchroman
• Emphasis on Spacing methods like IUCD
• Revitalizing Postpartum Family Planning including PPIUCD in order to capitalise on
the opportunity provided by increased institutional deliveries. Appointment of
counsellors at high institutional delivery facilities is a key activity.
• Strengthening community based distribution of contraceptives by involving ASHAs
and Focussed IEC/ BCC efforts for enhancing demand and creating awareness on
family planning
• Availability of Fixed Day Static Services at all facilities.
• Emphasis on minilap tubectomy services because of its logistical simplicity and
requirement of only MBBS doctors and not post graduate gynaecologists/ surgeons.
• A rational human resource development plan for IUCD, minilap and NSV be chalked
up to empower the facilities (DH, CHC, PHC, SHC) with at least one provider each for
each of the services and Sub Centres with ANMs trained in IUD insertion
• Ensuring quality care in Family Planning services by establishing Quality Assurance
Committees at state and district levels Plan for accreditation of more private/ NGO
facilities to increase the provider base for family planning services under PPP. 106
---
• Increasing male participation and promoting Non scalpel vasectomy
• Demand generation activities in the form of display of posters, billboards and other
audio and video materials in the various facilities be planned and budgeted
• Strong Political Will and Advocacy at the highest level, especially in states with high
fertility rates.
Compensation scheme in Public (Govt.) facilities (amounts in INR)
Category Type of Facility Others/ Total
operation Acceptor
11 High Focus States Vasectomy 2000 1000 3000
(Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya (All)
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Tubectomy 2000 1000 3000
Jharkhand, Odisha, Uttrakhand, (All)
Assam, Haryana, Gujarat)
Other High Focus States Vasectomy 1300 200 1500
(North East states except Assam, (All)
Jammu & Tubectomy 1350 150 1500
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh) (All)
Non High Focus States Vasectomy 1300 200 1500
(All)
Tubectomy 1350 150 1500
(BPL +SC/ST)



Source: Guidelines for Family Welfare Programme / www.nhm.gov.in



107
---
2
2

National Family Planning Indemnity Scheme (NFPIS)


For the sterilization services undertaken in India, compensation was provided to the
beneficiary; however, no viable insurance mechanism was in place to cover for failure or
incapacitation on account of undergoing the sterilization procedure and no indemnity cover
was provided to doctors/ health facilities providing sterilization services. Moreover, there
was a huge demand for indemnity insurance cover since many empanelled doctors were
facing litigation on account of claims filed by the beneficiaries for compensation following
failures/complications/ deaths. On the directives of the hon’ble Supreme court of India, the
GOI therefore launched the NFPIS in November 2005 to compensate the acceptors of
sterilization or his/her nominee in the unlikely event of complication, failure or death
following a sterilization operation. The scheme also provides for indemnity cover to the
medical officers and the health facilities for up to four cases of litigations per year that the
healthcare provider or the facility may face as a consequence of performing sterilization
operations.
This Insurance scheme underwent many revisions to best suit the everchanging demands
and protect the right of both the client and the provider.
Available benefits under the Family Planning Indemnity Scheme

Section Coverage Limits
I A Death attributable to sterilization (inclusive of death during process of Rs. 2 lakh
sterilization operation) in hospital or within 7 days from the date of
discharge from the hospital
I B Death attributable to sterilization within 8 – 30 days from the date of Rs. 50,000/-
discharge from the hospital
I C Failure of sterilization Rs 30,000/-
I D Cost of treatment in hospital and upto 60 days arising out of Actual not
complication attributable to sterilization operation (inclusive of exceeding
complication during process of sterilization operation) from the date of Rs. 25,000/-
discharge
II Indemnity per Doctor/Health Facilities but not more than 4 in a year Upto Rs. 2 Lakh
per claim
Source: India’s Vision 2020 / NHM

108
---
NUTRITION

109
---
1
1

Anemia Mukt Bharat (AMB)


The reduction of anemia is a crucial objective of the POSHAN Abhiyaan launched in March
2018. Complying with the targets of POSHAN Abhiyaan and National Nutrition Strategy set
by NITI Aayog, the Anemia Mukt Bharat was launched by the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare in 2018.
It uses the 6X6X6 strategy and aims to reduce the prevalence of anemia among various
groups, including children (6-59 months), children (5-9 years), adolescents (10-19 years),
pregnant women, lactating women, and women in reproductive age (15-49 years).
Anemia Mukt Bharat Interventions


1. Prophylactic Iron and Folic Acid supplementation
2. Deworming
3. Intensified year-round Behaviour Change Communication Campaign focusing on four
key behaviors:
o Improving compliance to Iron Folic Acid supplementation and deworming
o Appropriate infant and young child feeding practices
o Increase in intake of iron-rich food through diet diversity/quantity/frequency
and/or fortified foods with focus on harnessing locally available resources
o Ensuring delayed cord clamping after delivery (by 3 minutes) in health facilities
4. Testing and treatment of anemia, using digital methods and point of care treatment,
with special focus on pregnant women and school-going adolescents
5. Mandatory provision of Iron and Folic Acid fortified foods in government-funded public
health programs
6. Intensifying awareness, screening, and treatment of non-nutritional causes of anemia
in endemic pockets, with special focus on malaria, haemoglobinopathies, and
fluorosis



110
---
Anemia Mukt Bharat Institutional Mechanisms

1. Intra-Ministerial Coordination
2. National Anemia Mukt Bharat Unit
3. National Centre of Excellences
4. Convergence with other MinistriesAnemia
5. Strengthening Supply Chain and LogisticsBharatMukt
6. Anemia Mukt Bharat Dashboard and Digital Portal - One-Stop Shop on Anemia



111
---
112
---
124
million
17 Children
(6-59 months) 134
million million
women of
reproductive children
age (5-9 years)
20-24 years"
beneficiaries
27 115
million million
lactating adolescent boys
mothers and girls
30 (10-19 years)
million
pregnant
women
113
---
1 Intra-ministerial National Anemia Mukt
coordination Bharat Unit
National Centre
3 of Excellence and Convergence with
Advanced Research on other ministries
Anemia Control
Strengthening supply Anemia Mukt Bharat
5 chain and logistics dashboard and digital
Portal one-stop shop
for anemia

Prophylactic dose and regime for Iron Folic Acid supplementation as per following table.
Target Group Dose and regime By Whom
Children 6-59 months of Biweekly (Tuesday and Friday) ASHA
age 1 ml IFA syrup
Children 5-9 School Weekly (Shakti Diwas on every Tuesday)School
years of age Going 1 Pink IFA tablet teachers
Non-School Weekly (Shakti Diwas on every Tuesday)ASHA
Going 1 Pink IFA tablet
10–19 years School Weekly (Shakti Diwas on every Tuesday)School
of age Going 1 Blue IFA tablet teachers
adolescent
girls Non-School Weekly (Shakti Diwas on every Tuesday)AWW
Going 1 Blue IFA tablet



Source: Operational Guidelines for Anaemia Mukt Bharat
/https://anemiamuktbharat.info/ NHM



114
---
2
2

National Deworming Day (NDD)


About National Deworming Day

• A fixed National Deworming Day approach has the potential to ensure maximum
coverage with optimal utilization of resources, by leveraging existing programs and
infrastructure. A fixed day approach will:
• Motivate States/UTs to prioritize deworming within current ICDS and school health
programs
• Increase public awareness around deworming with standardized campaign
messages across the country
• Increase coverage of target beneficiaries
• Establish structures to easily track and respond to any cases of adverse events
• Ensure quality and consistency of coverage reporting
With an aim to intensify efforts towards STH control among children in India, the Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare, Government of India (GOI) has decided to observe National
Deworming Day (NDD) on 10th February of every year. All Government and Government
aided schools and Anganwadi Centers will be the sites for implementation of National
Deworming Day across the country. States/UTs are encouraged to involve private schools
as well to participate in the NDD.



Objective of NDD


The objective of National Deworming Day is to deworm all preschool and school-age
children (enrolled and non-enrolled) between the ages of 1-19 years through the platform of
schools and Anganwadi Centers in order to improve their overall health, nutritional status,
access to education and quality of life.
Target Beneficiaries


All children (both boys and girls) in the age group of 1-19 years.



115
---
States already conducting biannual deworming linked with Vitamin A Prophylaxis program
for children under-five shall continue to administer deworming drug along with Vitamin-A.
States currently not having bundling of these two interventions are encouraged to use the
platform of National Deworming Day for deworming under - five age group children.
Steps of Preparatory Action


• Establishment of National level, State level and District level Coordination
Committees
• Orientation and capacity building of stakeholders and providers
• Procurement of Albendazole tablets for target beneficiaries and its supply chain
management
• Adaptation of the IEC materials shared by Government of India and contextualize
as per local needs
• Printing of monitoring and reporting formats
• Community mobilization and awareness activities
• Planning for monitoring and evaluation activities
Source: National Deworming Day Guidelines / NHM



116
---
3
3

Nutrition Rehabilitation Center


Undernutrition is one of the most concerning health and development issues in India as in
other parts of the world. Undernutrition encompasses stunting (chronic malnutrition),
wasting (acute malnutrition) and deficiencies of micronutrients (essential vitamins and
minerals)
Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health


• Weight-for-age (underweight) – it is composite index of height-for-age and weight-for-
height. Children with low weight for their age are susceptible to various infections
compared to those with the standard weight for age. It is a comprehensive indicator
for malnutrition as it takes into account both acute and chronic malnutrition.
• Height-for-age (stunting) – this index is an indicator of linear growth retardation and
cumulative growth deficits. Children who are short for their age (stunted) are
chronically malnourished.
• Weight-for-height (wasting) – this index measures body mass in relation to body
length and describes current nutritional status. Children considered thin (wasted) for
their height are acutely malnourished.
Severe acute malnutrition is defined by very low weight-for-height/length (Z- score below -
3SD of the median WHO child growth standards) or by the presence of nutritional oedema
Nutrition Rehabilitation Center (NRC) is a unit in a health facility where children with Severe
Acute Malnutrition (SAM) are admitted and managed. Children are admitted as per the
defined admission criteria and provided with medical and nutritional therapeutic care. Once
discharged from the NRC, the child continues to be in the Nutrition Rehabilitation program
till she/he attains the defined discharge criteria from the program. In addition to curative care,
special focus is given on timely, adequate and appropriate feeding for children; and on
improving the skills of mothers and caregivers on complete age appropriate caring and
feeding practices. In addition, efforts are made to build the capacity of mothers/caregivers
through counselling and support to identify the nutrition and health problems in their child.



117
---
Objectives of Facility based management of SAM

• To provide clinical management and reduce mortality among children with severe
acute malnutrition, particularly among those with medical complications.
• To promote physical and psychosocial growth of children with severe acute
malnutrition (SAM).
• To build the capacity of mothers and other care givers in appropriate feeding and
caring practices for infants and young children
• To identify the social factors that contributed to the child slipping into severe acute
malnutrition.



The services and care provided for the in-patient management of SAM children include
• 24 hour care and monitoring of the child
• Treatment of medical complications.
• Providing sensory stimulation and emotional care. Social assessment of the family to
identify and address contributing factors.
• Counseling on appropriate feeding, care and hygiene.
• Demonstration and practice- by -doing on the preparation of energy dense child foods
using locally available, culturally acceptable and affordable food items.
• Follow up of children discharged from the facility



Source: Operational guidelines for Nutrition Rehabilitation Centre / NHM



118
---
44

Mother Absolute Affection (MAA)


Objective

o Build an enabling environment for breastfeeding through awareness generation
activities, targeting pregnant and lactating mothers, family members and society in
order to promote optimal breastfeeding practices as an important intervention for
child survival and development.
o Revitalizing efforts towards promotion, protection and support of breastfeeding
practices through health systems to achieve higher breastfeeding
rates.Reinforclactation support services at public health facilities through trained
healthcare providers and through skilled community health workers.
o To incentivize and recognize those health facilities that show high rates of
breastfeeding along with processes in place for lactation management.
Key Components


o Promotion of early initiation of breastfeeding and emphasis on exclusive
breastfeeding till 6 months of age through ASHA worker and health care provider at
health facilities.
o Communication for enhanced awareness and demand generation through mass
media and mid media.
o Implementation of breastfeeding policy for hospitals. Training and capacity
enhancement of nurses at government institutions, and all ANMs and ASHAs. They
will provide information and counselling support to mothers for breastfeeding;
o Community engagement by ASHAs for breastfeeding promotion, who will conduct
mothers’ meetings. Breastfeeding mothers requiring more support will be referred to
a health facility or the ANM sub-centre or the Village Health and Nutrition Day (VHND)
organized every month at the village level;
o Celebration of World Breastfeeding Week (WBW) from 1st to 7th August every year
across the country to increase engagement and create positive momentum for
119
---
breastfeeding with diverse stakeholders. Recognition and team awards will be given
to facilities showing good performance
o Establishment of comprehensive lactation management centres and lactation
management units for ensuring availability of safe pasteurized donor human milk and
expressed mother’s own breast milk suitable for feeding sick, preterm and low birth
weight babies.
Target Beneficiaries


Pregnant and lactating mothers, , Families Members and Community Members



Source: https://nhm.gov.in/index1.php?lang=1&level=3&sublinkid=1450&lid=799 /
NHM



120
---
55

Lactation Management Centre


High to less complex models of lactation management centres can be set up depending
upon the need of health facilities in terms of number of newborns requiring donor human
milk, availability of space and human resources. The lactation management centres would
be established at three levels:
Comprehensive Lactation Management Centres (CLMCs)


Comprehensive Lactation Management Centres (CLMCs) will be established in phases:
First Phase: CLMCs will be established at all Medical Colleges that meet the pre-requisites
on assessment carried out by State/District Quality Assurance Committee.
Second Phase: In the second phase, CLMCs will be established in the District Hospitals that
meet the pre-requisite for establishing CLMCs on assessment carried out by State/District
Quality Assurance Committee.
The CLMCs will follow technical protocols with respect to adequate space, requisite
manpower and equipment. It shall also conform to quality standards and protocols with
respect to donor screening, collection, processing, storage and dispensation of human milk.
Lactation Management Units (LMUs):


LMUs can be established at all sub-district hospitals and FRUs that meet the prerequisite
criteria on assessment carried out by State/District Quality Assurance Committee. These
LMUs will facilitate expression and collection of mother’s own milk only. LMUs will conform
to the quality standards and technical protocol with respect to collection, storage and
dispensation of mother’s milk for consumption by her own baby admitted at SNCUs.
Lactation Support Units (LSUs):


To maintain the continuum of care, Lactation Support Units (LSUs) will be constituted in all
Delivery Points (DPs) by forming a dedicated team of IYCF trained staff to provide round the
clock breastfeeding support, lactation counselling and Kangaroo Mother Care (KMC) support
to mothers. The lactation support unit would have a dedicated space/room where lactating
mothers visiting the health facility can breastfeed in privacy. Information about breastfeeding 121
---
space will be prominently displayed for providing greater visibility and support for
breastfeeding. The identified space/room for breastfeeding as per MAA guidelines of MoHFW
under MAA programme will be utilized for this purpose. The Lactation Support Unit would
ensure that the health facility is well equipped with necessary IEC material and display of
IEC on breastfeeding in ANC ward/delivery ward and ANC clinics as per MAA Guidelines of
MoHFW.
Source: National Guidelines on O Lactation Management Centres in Public Health
Facilities / NHM



122
---
7
7

Mission POSHAN


Government is implementing several schemes and programs under the Umbrella Integrated
Child Development Services Scheme as direct targeted interventions to address the problem
of malnutrition in the country. All these schemes address one or other aspects related to
nutrition and have the potential to improve nutritional outcomes in the country.
Malnutrition is not a direct cause of death but contributes to mortality and morbidity by
reducing resistance to infections. There are a number of causes of death of children such as
prematurity, low birth weight, pneumonia, diarrhoeal diseases, non-communicable
diseases, birth asphyxia & birth trauma, injuries, congenital anomalies, acute bacterial
sepsis and severe infections, etc.
Prime Minister's Overarching Scheme for Holistic Nutrition (POSHAN) Abhiyaan (National
Nutrition Mission) is a flagship programme of the Ministry of Women and Child Development
(MWCD), Government of India, which ensures convergence with various programmes i.e.,
Anganwadi Services, Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana (PMMVY), Scheme for
Adolescent Girls (SAG) of MWCD Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY), National Health Mission
(NHM), Swachh-Bharat Mission, Public Distribution System (PDS), Department Food &
Public Distribution, Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(MGNREGS) and Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation.
About the Mission


The goals of NNM are to achieve improvement in nutritional status of Children from 0-6
years, Adolescent Girls, Pregnant Women and Lactating Mothers in a time bound manner.
The NNM is a comprehensive approach towards raising nutrition level in the country on a war
footing. It will comprise mapping of various Schemes contributing towards addressing
malnutrition, including a very robust convergence mechanism, ICT based Real Time
Monitoring system, incentivizing States/UTs for meeting the targets, incentivizing Anganwadi
Workers (AWWs) for using IT based tools, eliminating registers used by AWWs, introducing
measurement of height of children at the Anganwadi Centres (AWCs), Social Audits, setting-
up Nutrition Resource Centres, involving masses through Jan Andolan for their participation
on nutrition through various activities, among others.
123
---
Major impact

The programme through the targets will strive to reduce the level of stunting, under-nutrition,
anemia and low birth weight babies.
NNM targets to reduce stunting, under- nutrition, anemia (among young children, women and
adolescent girls) and reduce low birth weight by 2%, 2%, 3% and 2% per annum respectively.
Source: Overview of Mission Poshan / NHM



124
---
NATIONAL

HEALTH
PROGRAMMES



125
---
11

National Viral Hepatitis Control Program (NVHCP)


Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has launched the ‘National Viral Hepatitis Control
Program’, with the goal of ending viral hepatitis as a public health threat by 2030 in the
country.
Viral hepatitis in India


Viral hepatitis is increasingly being recognized as a public health problem in India. Hepatitis A
Virus (HAV) and Hepatitis E Virus (HEV) are important causes of acute viral hepatitis and
Acute Liver Failure (ALF). Due to paucity of data, the exact burden of disease for the country
is not established. However, available literature indicates a wide range and suggests that
HAV is responsible for 10-30% of acute hepatitis and 5- 15% of acute liver failure cases in
India. It is further reported that HEV accounts for 10-40% of acute hepatitis and 15-45% of
acute liver failure.



Hepatitis B surface Antigen (HBsAg) positivity in the general population ranges from 1.1% to
12.2%, with an average prevalence of 3-4%. Anti-Hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody
prevalence in the general population is estimated to be between 0.09-15%. Based on some
regional level studies, it is estimated that in India, approximately 40 million people are
chronically infected with Hepatitis B and 6-12 million people with Hepatitis C. Chronic HBV
infection accounts for 40% of Hepato-cellular Carcinoma (HCC) and 20-30% cases of
cirrhosis in India. Chronic HCV infection accounts for 12-32% of HCC and 12-20% of
cirrhosis.



A systematic review of available information from published studies and from large
unpublished reliable datasets, to assess the prevalence of chronic HCV infection in the
Indian population has recently been done to assess the prevalence of overall HCV infections,
and by age, sex, risk factors and place in the country. This meta-analysis data estimated that
India (current population approx. 1.3 billion) has 5.2-13 million anti- HCV positive persons.
As the data on HCV viremia amongst the anti-HCV positive persons were not available, data



126
---
from elsewhere was used to estimate that India has about 3 million to 9 million persons with
active HCV infections.



Aim


• Combat hepatitis and achieve country wide elimination of Hepatitis C by 2030
• Achieve significant reduction in the infected population, morbidity and mortality
associated with Hepatitis B and C viz. Cirrhosis and Hepato-cellular carcinoma (liver
cancer)
• Reduce the risk, morbidity and mortality due to Hepatitis A and E.
Key Objectives


• Enhance community awareness on hepatitis and lay stress on preventive measures
among general population especially high-risk groups and in hotspots.
• Provide early diagnosis and management of viral hepatitis at all levels of healthcare
• Develop standard diagnostic and treatment protocols for management of viral
hepatitis and its complications.
• Strengthen the existing infrastructure facilities, build capacities of existing human
resource and raise additional human resources, where required, for providing
comprehensive services for management of viral hepatitis and its complications in all
districts of the country.
• Develop linkages with the existing National programs towards awareness,
prevention, diagnosis and treatment for viral hepatitis.
• Develop a web-based “Viral Hepatitis Information and Management System” to
maintain a registry of persons affected with viral hepatitis and its sequelae
Components


The key components include:
Preventive component: This remains the cornerstone of the NVHCP. It will include
• Awareness generation
• Immunization of Hepatitis B (birth dose, high risk groups, health care workers)
127
---
• Safety of blood and blood products
• Injection safety, safe socio-cultural practices
• Safe drinking water, hygiene and sanitary toilets
Diagnosis and Treatment:



• Screening of pregnant women for HBsAg to be done in areas where institutional
deliveries are < 80% to ensure their referral for institutional delivery for birth dose
Hepatitis B vaccination.
• Free screening, diagnosis and treatment for both hepatitis B and C would be made
available at all levels of health care in a phased manner.
• Provision of linkages, including with private sector and not for profit institutions,for
diagnosis and treatment.
• Engagement with community/peer support to enhance and ensure adherence to
treatment and demand generation.
• Monitoring and Evaluation, Surveillance and Research Effective linkages to the
surveillance system would be established and operational research would be
undertaken through Department of Health Research (DHR). Standardised M&E
framework would be developed and an online web based system established.
Training and capacity Building:
This would be a continuous process and will be supported by NCDC, ILBS and state tertiary
care institutes and coordinated by NVHCP. The hepatitis induction and update programs for
all level of health care workers would be made available using both, the traditional cascade
model of training through master trainers and various platforms available for enabling
electronic, e- learning and e-courses.
Source : Operational Guidelines of NVHCP /Ministry of Health and Family Welfare/NHM



128
---
2
2

National Viral Hepatitis Surveillance Programme


Viral hepatitis is an inflammation of the liver caused by one of the five hepatitis viruses,
referred to as types A, B, C, D and E. The Government of India through the National Centre for
Disease Control is implementing the National Viral Hepatitis Surveillance Programme.
Objectives


• To establish laboratory network for laboratory based surveillance of viral hepatitis
in different geographical locations of India.
• To ascertain the prevalence of different types of viral hepatitis in different zones of the
country.
• To provide laboratory support for outbreak investigation of hepatitis through
established network of laboratories.
• To develop technical material for generating awareness among healthcare
providers and in the community about waterborne and blood borne hepatitis.
Targets


• Establishment of laboratory based surveillance for viral hepatitis in the country for
collection of data. Development of testing and surveillance guidelines and its
dissemination.
• A network of laboratories with quality testing for hepatitis markers will be established
covering the entire country
• Training of manpower/health care providers in 10 regional labs including NCDC i.e.
the reference lab.
• Development of IEC for providers and community.
• Establishment of baseline data for hepatitis to see the impact



Source: National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC)



129
---
383

National Mental Health Programme (NMHP)


Introduction

Psychiatric symptoms are common in general population in both sides of the globe. These
symptoms – worry, tiredness, and sleepless nights affect more than half of the adults at some
time, while as many as one person in seven experiences some form of diagnosable neurotic
disorder.
Burden of Disease


The World Bank report (1993) revealed that the Disability Adjusted Life Year (DALY) loss due
to neuro- psychiatric disorder is much higher than diarrhea, malaria, worm infestations and
tuberculosis if taken individually. According to the estimates daily loss due to mental
disorders are expected to represent 15% of the global burden of diseases by 2020.
During the last two decades, many epidemiological studies have been conducted in India,
which show that the prevalence of major psychiatric disorder is about the same all over the
world. The prevalence reported from these studies range from the population of 18 to 207 per
1000 with the median 65.4 per 1000 and at any given time, about 2 –3 % of the population,
suffer from seriously, incapacitating mental disorders or epilepsy.
Most of these patients live in rural areas remote from any modern mental health facilities. A
large number of adult patients (10.4 – 53%) coming to the general OPD are diagnosed
mentally ill. However, these patients are usually missed because either medical officer or
general practitioner at the primary health care unit does not ask detailed mental health
history. Due to the under-diagnosis of these patients, unnecessary investigations and
treatments are offered which heavily cost to the health providers.
Programme


The Government of India has launched the National Mental Health Program (NMHP) in 1982,
keeping in view the heavy burden of mental illness in the community, and the absolute
inadequacy of mental health care infrastructure in the country to deal with it.



130
---
Components of NMHP

1. Treatment of Mentally ill
2. Rehabilitation
3. Prevention and promotion of positive mental health.
Aims


• Prevention and treatment of mental and neurological disorders and their associated
disabilities.
• Use of mental health technology to improve general health services.
• Application of mental health principles in total national development to improve
quality of life.
Objectives


• To ensure availability and accessibility of minimum mental health care for all in the
foreseeable future, particularly to the most vulnerable and underprivileged sections
of population.
• To encourage application of mental health knowledge in general health care
and in social development.
• To promote community participation in the mental health services development
and to stimulate efforts towards self-help in the community.
Strategies


• Integration mental health with primary health care through the NMHP
• Provision of tertiary care institutions for treatment of mental disorders
• Eradicating stigmatization of mentally ill patients and protecting their rights through
regulatory institutions like the Central Mental Health Authority, and State Mental
health Authority.
Mental Health care


• The mental morbidity requires priority in mental health treatment
• Primary health care at village and sub center level
• At Primary Health Center level
• At the District Hospital level 131
---
• Mental Hospital and teaching Psychiatric Units
Source: nihfw.nic.in



132
---
4
4

National Tobacco Control Programme (NTCP)


Introduction

Tobacco use is one of the main risk factors for a number of chronic diseases, including cancer,
lung diseases, and cardiovascular diseases. India is the 2nd largest producer and consumer
of tobacco and a variety of forms of tobacco use is unique to India. Apart from the smoked
forms that include cigarettes, bidis and cigars, a plethora of smokeless forms of
consumption exist in the country.
The Government of India has enacted the national tobacco-control legislation namely, “The
Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of
Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003” in May, 2003.
India also ratified the WHO-Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO-FCTC) in
February 2004. Further, in order to facilitate the effective implementation of the Tobacco
Control Law, to bring about greater awareness about the harmful effects of tobacco as well
as to fulfill the obligations under the WHO-FCTC, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
Government of India launched the National Tobacco Control Programme (NTCP) in 2007- 08
in 42 districts of 21 States/Union Territories of the country.
Currently, the Programme is being implemented in all States/Union Territories covering over
600 districts across the country.
Objectives


• To bring about greater awareness about the harmful effects of tobacco use and
Tobacco Control Laws.
• To facilitate effective implementation of the Tobacco Control Laws.
The objective of this programme is to control tobacco consumption and minimize the deaths
caused by it. The various activities planned to control tobacco use are as follows:



• Training and Capacity Building
• IEC activity
• Monitoring Tobacco Control Laws and Reporting
• Survey and Surveillance 133
---
• Harmful effects of smoking and Second-hand Smoke Exposure
Stroke
Elininex Yiddl
Repnton
LDTU
taronan Lornin
Tra-hca Fumteni
Dronchi distuie
Dnron
Xonc phatnucth
nlmnmn
buud uthe
omrn;
Harmful Effects of using smokeless Tobacco
TOBACCO KILLS TOBACCO KILLS]
TOBACCO KILLS TOBACCO KILLS
134
---
Implementation

NTCP is implemented through a three-tier structure, i.e.
• National Tobacco Control Cell (NTCC) at Central level
• State Tobacco Control Cell (STCC) at State level &
• District Tobacco Control Cell (DTCC) at District level. There is also a provision of
setting up Tobacco Cessation Services at District level.
Natbnal
National Level Tabltco Control
State Level State Tobacco Control Cell
District Level District Tobacco Control Cell
Social Worker+Data Enty Operator
Major Achievements


• The prevalence of tobacco use has reduced by six percentage points from 34.6% to
28.6% during the period from 2009-10 to 2016-17. The number of tobacco users has
reduced by about 81 lakh (8.1 million).
• The Government launched the National Tobacco Cessation Quitline Services (1800-
112-356) which aims to guide tobacco addicts to quit tobacco. 135
---
• Large specified health warnings on tobacco products covering 85% on both side of
the principal display area of tobacco product packs and inclusion of Quitline Number
(1800112356) in the specified health warnings for creating awareness among
tobacco users, and give them access to counseling services to effect behavior
change.
• 'mCessation' initiative is being supported by Ministry to support tobacco users
towards successful quitting through text-messaging via mobile phones (011
22901701).
• Regulation of the use of Cigarettes and other tobacco products in films and TV
programmes.
• Acceded to the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products under the Article
15 of WHO FCTC.
• Issued an Advisory to ban Electronic Nicotine Delivery System (ENDS) including e-
Cigarettes, Heat- Not-Burn devices, Vape, e-Sheesha, e-Nicotine Flavored Hookah,
and the like devices that enable nicotine delivery except for the purpose & in the
manner and to the extent, as may be approved under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act,
1940 and Rules made thereunder.
• Established three National Tobacco Testing Laboratories
• Enacted The Prohibition of Electronic Cigarettes (Production, Manufacture, Import,
Export, Transport, Sale, Distribution, Storage and Advertisement) Act, 2019



Source: Operational guidelines of NTCP / National Health Mission



136
---
55

National Programme for Prevention and Control of

Deafness (NPPCD)

Introduction

Hearing loss is the most common sensory deficit in humans today. World over, it is the second
leading cause for ‘Years lived with Disability (YLD)’ the first being depression. There are large
number of hearing-impaired young people in India which amounts to a severe loss of
productivity, both physical and economic.
An even larger percentage of our population suffers from milder degrees of hearing loss and
unilateral (one sided) hearing loss against the above background, The Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, Govt. of India launched the pilot phase of National Program for Prevention
and Control of Deafness (from 2006 to 2008) in 10 States and 1 Union Territory in an effort to
tackle the high incidence of deafness in the country, in view of the preventable nature of this
disability.
Objectives of the Programme


• To prevent the avoidable hearing loss on account of disease or injury.
• Early identification, diagnosis and treatment of ear problems responsible for hearing
loss and deafness
• To medically rehabilitate persons of all age groups, suffering with deafness.
• To strengthen the existing inter-sectoral linkages for continuity of the rehabilitation
Program, for persons with deafness
• To develop institutional capacity for ear care services by providing support for
equipment and material and training personnel.
Components of the Programme


• Manpower training and development– For prevention, early identification and
management of hearing impaired and deafness cases, training would be provided
from medical college level specialists (ENT and Audiology) to grass root level
workers.
137
---
• Capacity building – For the district hospital, community health centers and primary
health center in respect of ENT/ Audiology infrastructure.
• Service provision – Early detection and management of hearing and speech impaired
cases and rehabilitation, at different levels of health care delivery system.
• Awareness generation through IEC/BCC activities – For early identification of hearing
impaired, especially children so that timely management of such cases is possible
and to remove the stigma attached to deafness.
Strategies


• To strengthen the service delivery for ear care
• To develop human resource for ear care services.
• To promote public awareness through appropriate and effective IEC strategies
with special emphasis on prevention of deafness.
• To develop institutional capacity of the district hospitals, community health centers
and primary health centers selected under the Programme.
Expected Benefits of the Programme


The Programme is expected to generate the following benefits: -
• Availability of various services like prevention, early identification, treatment, referral,
rehabilitation etc. for hearing impairment and deafness as the primary health center /
community health centers / district hospitals largely cater to their need.
• Decrease in the magnitude of hearing-impaired persons.
• Decrease in the severity/ extent of ear morbidity or hearing impairment.
• Improved service network/referral system for the persons with ear morbidity/hearing
impairment.
• Awareness creation among the health workers/grass root level workers through
the primary health centre medical officers and district health officers, which will
percolate to the lower-level health workers functioning within the community.
• Capacity building at the district hospitals to ensure better care.



Source: Operational Guidelines of NPPCD/ National Health Portal
138
---
6
6

National Programme for Control of Blindness and Visual

Impairment (NPCBVI)

National Programme for Control of Blindness was launched in the year 1976 with the goal to
reduce the prevalence of blindness from 1.4% to 0.3%. As per Survey in 2001-02, prevalence
of blindness is estimated to be 1.1%. Rapid Survey on Avoidable Blindness conducted under
NPCB during 2006-07 showed reduction in the prevalence of blindness from 1.1% (2001-02)
to 1% (2006-07). Various activities/initiatives undertaken during the Five-Year Plans under
NPCB were targeted towards achieving the goal of reducing the prevalence of blindness to
0.3% by the year 2020. The National Blindness Survey (2015-19) has shown reduction in the
prevalence of blindness from 1% (2007) to 0.36% (2019).
In the beginning it was a 100% Centrally Sponsored scheme. From 12th FYP it is 60:40 in all
States/UTs and 90:10 in hilly states and all NE States. Nomenclature of the programme was
also changed from National Programme for Control of Blindness to National Programme for
Control of Blindness & Visual Impairment (NPCBVI) in 2017.
Main causes of blindness


• Cataract (66.2 %)
• Corneal opacity (7.4%)
• Cataract surgical complications (7.2%)
• Posterior segment disorders excluding DR and ARMD (5.9%) and
• Glaucoma (5.5%).
Goal


Under the National Health Policy (NHP), the target is to reduce the prevalence of blindness to
0.25% by 2025.
Major activities under the Programme


• Primary eye care services



139
---
• Preventive and promotive eye care services: under comprehensive primary health
care Ayushman Arogya Mandirs (AAM) are providing preventive and promotive eye
care services.
• IEC activities for promotion and preventive eye care and eye donation.
• Secondary eye care services
• Cataract surgeries: Reduction in the backlog of cataract by performing cataract
surgeries in Governmental, Non-Governmental Eye Hospitals and private
practitioners.
• Screening for Refractive errors and Distribution of free Spectacles: Screening of
Children for identification and treatment refractive errors and distribution of
spectacles to those who are suffering from refractive errors through school eye
screening programme.
• Distribution of free spectacles to old persons suffering from presbyopia to enable
them for undertaking near work as a new initiative under the programme.
• Management of Visual impairment: The programme is now geared to take care of all
categories of visual impairment including low vision cases. Apart from cataract, now
the focus of the programme is on treatment and management of other eye diseases
like glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, vitreo retinal diseases, Corneal blindness and
childhood blindness.
• Use of Mobile Ophthalmic Units and Tele- ophthalmology network to expand coverage
and reach of the programme in disadvantaged and hard to reach areas.
• Eye banking Services: Strengthening of eye banking services and collection of donated
eyes.
Tertiary Eye care Services


• Under the tertiary care component of NPCB&VI
• Grant in Aid for strengthening of Regional Institute of Ophthalmology and Medical
Colleges to provide super-speciality eye care services
• Hands on Training of Govt. Eye Surgeons for upgradation of their clinical and surgical
skills.
• IEC campaigns
• Research and surveys
• Infrastructure Development and Capacity building 140
---
• Grant in Aid for strengthening of eye care units at primary and secondary level.
• Training of Paramedical Ophthalmic Assistant and Eye donation counsellors.
Newer Initiatives/ Focus Areas under the program


Revision of NPCBVI guidelines to provide Comprehensive eye health care through AB-
Ayushman Arogya Mandirs
“Standards of eye banking in India 2020” have been launched for improvement in eye
donation, collection, processing, and maintenance of quality standards, equitable
distribution of scarce corneal tissue, strengthening of institutional capacity for corneal
transplantation, community awareness and training of health personnel.
Development of a network of eye banks and eye donation centres and linked with medical
colleges and RIOs to promote collection and timely utilization of donated eyes in a
transparent manner
Focus on other causes of Visual impairment, besides Cataract, treatment/management of
other eye diseases like Diabetic retinopathy (DR), Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP). Corneal
Blindness and glaucoma have been increased. DR screening and glaucoma clinics have been
made integral part at district and sub-district hospitals.
In order to achieve elimination of trachoma by the year 2020 as per WHO global action plan,
surveillance, case detection and treatment of Trachoma trichiasis (TT) is being executed
which will be followed by TT only survey in all previously trachoma endemic districts.
Issuing of COVID 19 guidelines to all stakeholders for safe ophthalmology practices to
minimize and avoid the spread of COVID 19 in eye care facilities. Setting up of super-specialty
clinics for all major eye diseases including diabetic retinopathy, glaucoma, retinopathy of
prematurity etc. in state level hospitals and medical colleges all over the country.
Linkage of tele-ophthalmology centres at PHC/ Vision centres with super-specialty eye
hospitals to ensure delivery of best possible diagnosis and treatment for eye diseases,
especially in hilly terrains and difficult areas.



Source: National Programme for Control of Blindness & Visual Impairment
(NPCBVI)/NHM 141
---
7
7

National Programme on Climate Change & Human

Health (NPCCHH)

The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare launched the National Program for Climate Change
and Human Health (NPCCHH) in 2019.
Objectives


The NPCCHH objectives with some initially identified key actions are:
• To create awareness among general population (vulnerable community), health-care
providers and Policy makers regarding impacts of climate change on human health.
• To strengthen capacity of healthcare system to reduce illnesses/ diseases due to
variability in climate
• To strengthen health preparedness and response by performing situational analysis
at national/ state/ district/ below district levels.
• To develop partnerships and create synchrony/ synergy with other missions and
ensure that health is adequately represented in the climate change agenda in the
country
• To strengthen research capacity to fill the evidence gap on climate change impact on
human health
Key activities


• Development of IEC material on health impacts of Climate variability & change
• Advocacy on health impacts of Climate variability & change
• Strengthening of health care system in context of climate change
• Capacity building for vulnerability assessment at various levels and liaison with centre
• Develop/ strengthen the monitoring and surveillance systems for climate sensitive
diseases
• Develop mechanisms for EWS/ alerts and responses at state, district and below
district level
• Develop joint action plan with other deptt. / Organizations in view of their
capabilities and complementarities 142
---
• Integrate, adopt and implement environment friendly measures suggested in other
missions on climate change
• Strengthening of healthcare services based on researches on climate variables and
impact on human health
Expected Output


• Awareness & Behavior modification of general population for impact, illnesses,
prevention and adaptive measures for climate sensitive illnesses.
• Increase in trained healthcare personnel and equipped institutes/ organization
towards achievement of climate resilient healthcare services and infrastructure at
district level in each state.
• Integrated monitoring system for collection and analysis of health- r e l a t e d data
with meteorological parameters, environmental, socio-economic and occupational
factors
• Regulation on key environmental determinants of health: air quality, water
quality, food, waste management, agriculture, transport.
• Evidence–based support to policy makers, programme planners and related
stakeholders



Source: NPCCHH operational guidelines



143
---
8
8

National Programme for the Health Care for the Elderly


The National Programme for the Health Care for the Elderly (NPHCE) is an articulation of the
International and national commitments of the Government as envisaged under the UN
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD), National Policy on Older
Persons (NPOP) adopted by the Government of India in 1999 & Section 20 of “The
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007” dealing with provisions
for medical care of Senior Citizen.
Vision


• To provide accessible, affordable, and high-quality long-term, comprehensive and
dedicated care services to an Ageing population; Creating a new “architecture” for
Ageing;
• To build a framework to create an enabling environment for “a Society for all Ages”;
• To promote the concept of Active and Healthy Ageing.
Specific Objectives


• To provide an easy access to promotional, preventive, curative and rehabilitative
services to the elderly through community based primary health care approach
• To identify health problems in the elderly and provide appropriate health
interventions in the community with a strong referral backup support.
• To build capacity of the medical and paramedical professionals as well as the care-
takers within the family for providing health care to the elderly.
• To provide referral services to the elderly patients through district hospitals,
regional medical institutions
Convergence with National Rural Health Mission, AYUSH and other line departments like
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.
Core Strategies


• Community based primary health care approach including domiciliary visits by trained
health care workers.
• Dedicated services at PHC/CHC level including provision of machinery, equipment,
training, additional human resources (CHC), IEC, etc
144
---
• Dedicated facilities at District Hospital with 10 bedded wards, additional human
resources, machinery & equipment, consumables & drugs, training and IEC
• Strengthening of 8 Regional Medical Institutes to provide dedicated tertiary level
medical facilities for the Elderly, introducing PG courses in Geriatric Medicine, and in-
service training of health personnel at all levels Information, Education &
Communication (IEC) using mass media, folk media and other communication
channels to reach out to the target community
• Continuous monitoring and independent evaluation of the Programme and research in
Geriatrics and implementation of NPHCE
Supplementary Strategies


• Promotion of public private partnerships in Geriatric Health Care.
• Mainstreaming AYUSH – revitalizing local health traditions, and convergence with
programmes of Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in the field of geriatrics.
• Reorienting medical education to support geriatric issues.
Expected Outcomes


• Regional Geriatric Centres (RGC) in 8 Regional Medical Institutions by setting up
Regional Geriatric Centres with a dedicated Geriatric OPD and 30-bedded Geriatric
ward for management of specific diseases of the elderly, training of health personnel
in geriatric health care and conducting research;
• Post-graduates in Geriatric Medicine (16) from the 8 regional medical institutions;
• Video Conferencing Units in the 8 Regional Medical Institutions to be utilized for
capacity building and mentoring;
• District Geriatric Units with dedicated Geriatric OPD and 10-bedded Geriatric
ward in 80-100 District Hospitals;
• Geriatric Clinics/Rehabilitation units set up for domiciliary visits in
Community/Primary Health Centres in the selected districts;
• Sub-centres provided with equipment for community outreach services;
• Training of Human Resources in the Public Health Care System in Geriatric Care.
Source: Operational guidelines of NPHCE / NHM-Ministry of Health & Family Welfare



145
---
99

National Rabies Control Programme


Background

Rabies is responsible for extensive morbidity and mortality in India. The disease is endemic
throughout the country. With the exception of Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands,
human cases of rabies are reported from all over the country. The cases occur throughout the
year. About 96% of the mortality and morbidity is associated with dog bites. Cats, wolf,
jackal, mongoose and monkeys are other important reservoirs of rabies in India. Bat rabies
has not been conclusively reported from the country.
To address the issue of rabies in the country, National Rabies Control Programme was
approved during 12th FYP by Standing Finance Committee meeting held on 03.10.2013 as
Central Sector Scheme to be implemented under the Umbrella of National Health Mission.
Objectives


• Training of Health Care professionals on appropriate Animal bite management and
Rabies Post Exposure Prophylaxis.
• Advocacy for states to adopt and implement Intradermal route of Post exposure
prophylaxis for Animal bite Victims and Pre exposure prophylaxis for high-risk
categories.
• Strengthen Human Rabies Surveillance System.
• Strengthening of Regional Laboratories under NRCP for Rabies Diagnosis.
• Creating awareness in the community through Advocacy & Communication and
Social Mobilization.
Programme components


• The Programme had two components – Human and Animal Components.
• Human Component for roll out in the all States and UTs through nodal agency
National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC), Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,
Government of India
• Animal Health Component for pilot testing in Haryana and Chennai through nodal
agency Animal Welfare Board of India (AWBI) under the aegis of MoEF&CC, GOI.
146
---
• Animal Health Component by AWBI has been ended with effect from 31.3.2017. The
Human Health Component has been rolled out in 26 States and UTs.
Strategies


Provision of rabies vaccine & rabies immunoglobulin through national free drug initiatives
training on appropriate animal bite management, prevention and control of rabies,
surveillance and intersectoral coordination strengthening surveillance of animal bites and
rabies deaths reporting creating awareness about rabies prevention.
Source: Operational guidelines of NRCP / NHM



147
---
10
10

National Programme for Palliative Care (NPPC)


Brief Description

Palliative care is also known as supportive care which is required in the terminal cases of
Cancer, AIDS etc. and can be provided relatively simply and inexpensively. Effective
palliative care requires a broad multidisciplinary approach that includes the family and
makes use of available community resources. It can be provided in tertiary care facilities, in
community health centres and even in patients’ homes. It improves the quality of life of
patients and families who face life-threatening illness, by providing pain and symptom relief,
spiritual and psychosocial support from diagnosis to the end of life and bereavement.
The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India constituted an expert group on
Palliative care which submitted its report ‘Proposal of Strategies for Palliative Care in India’
in November, 2012. On the basis of the Report, an EPC note for 12th Five Year Plan was
formulated. No separate budget is allocated for the implementation of National Palliative
Care Program. However, the Palliative Care is part of the ‘Mission Flexipool’ under National
Health Mission (NHM).
A model PIP, a framework of operational and financial guidelines, for the states has been
designed. On the basis of a model PIP, the states/UTs may prepare their proposals related
with Palliative Care and incorporate them in their respective PIPs to seek financial support
under NHM.
Goal


Availability and accessibility of rational, quality pain relief and palliative care to the needy,
as an integral part of Health Care at all levels, in alignment with the community requirements.
Objectives


• Improve the capacity to provide palliative care service delivery within government
health programs such as the National Program for Prevention and Control of Cancer,
Cardiovascular Disease, Diabetes, and Stroke; National Program for Health Care of
the Elderly; the National AIDS Control Program; and the National Rural Health
Mission. 148
---
• Refine the legal and regulatory systems and support implementation to ensure
access and availability of Opioids for medical and scientific use while maintaining
measure for preventing diversion and misuse
• Encourage attitudinal shifts amongst healthcare professionals by strengthening and
incorporating principles of long-term care and palliative care into the educational
curricula (of medical, nursing, pharmacy and social work courses).
• Promote behaviour change in the community through increasing public awareness
and improved skills and knowledge regarding pain relief and palliative care leading to
community owned initiatives supporting health care system.
• Develop national standards for palliative care services and continuously evolve the
design and implementation of the National program to ensure progress towards the
vision of the program.
Implementation mechanism


It is envisaged that activities would be initiated through National Program for prevention and
control of cancer, CVD, Diabetes & Stroke. The integration of national programs are being
attempted under the common umbrella for synergistic activities. Thus, strategies proposed
will provide essential funding to build capacity within the key health programs for non-
communicable disease, including cancer, HIV/AIDS, and efforts targeting elderly
populations. Working across ministries of health and finance, the program will also ensure
that the national law and regulations allow for access to medical and scientific use of
Opioids.
The regulatory aspects, as mentioned in the Program, for increasing Morphine availability
would be addressed by Department of Revenue in coordination with Central Drug Standards
Control Organization. Cooperation of international and national agencies in the field of
palliative care would be taken for successful implementation of the program.
The major strategies proposed are provision of funds for establishing state palliative care cell
and palliative care services at the district hospital.



Source: Operational Guidelines of NPPC / NHM



149
---
11
11

National
Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control
Programme (NIDDCP)

Introduction

Iodine is an essential micronutrient required daily at 100-150 micrograms for normal human
growth and development. Deficiency of iodine can cause physical and mental retardation,
cretinism, abortions, stillbirth, deaf mutism, squint & various types of goiters.
Realizing the magnitude of the problem, the Government of India launched a 100 per cent
centrally assisted National Goiter Control Programme (NGCP) in 1962. In August, 1992 the
National Goiter Control Programme (NGCP) was renamed as National Iodine Deficiency
Disorders Control Programme (NIDDCP) with a view of wide spectrum of Iodine Deficiency
Disorders like mental and physical retardation, deaf mutism, cretinism, still births, abortions
etc. The programme is being implemented in all the States/UTs for entire population.
Goal


• To bring the prevalence of IDD to below 5% in the country
• To ensure 100% consumption of adequately iodated salt (15ppm) at the household
level.
Objectives


• Surveys to assess the magnitude of Iodine Deficiency Disorders in the districts.
• Supply of iodated salt in place of common salt.
• Resurveys to assess iodine deficiency disorders and the impact of iodated salt after
every 5 years in the districts.
• Laboratory monitoring of iodated salt and urinary iodine excretion.
• Health Education and Publicity.
Policy


On the recommendations of Central Council of Health in 1984, the Government took a
policy decision to Iodate the entire edible salt in the country by 1992. The programme
150
---
started in April, 1986 in a phased manner. To date, the annual production of iodated salt in
our country is 65 lakh metric tones per annum.
Nodal Ministry: Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is the nodal Ministry for implementation
of National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme (NIDDCP).
Under NIDDCP financial assistance is also being provided to Salt Commissioner’s Office,
Jaipur, (M/o Industries) which is responsible for promoting production of iodated salt,
monitoring, distribution and quality control of Iodated salt at the production level through
nine quality control laboratories.



Source: Operational guidelines of NIDDCP / NHM/MoHFW



151
---
12
12

Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme


Integrated Disease Surveillance Project (IDSP) was launched by Hon’ble Union Minister
of Health & Family Welfare in November 2004 for a period upto March 2010. The project
was restructured and extended up to March 2012. The project continues in the 12th Plan
with domestic budget as Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme under NHM for all
States with Budgetary allocation of 640 Cr.
A Central Surveillance Unit (CSU) at Delhi, State Surveillance Units (SSU) at all State/UT
headquarters and District Surveillance Units (DSU) at all Districts in the country have
been established.
Mission


To strengthen the disease surveillance in the country by establishing a decentralized
State based surveillance system for epidemic prone diseases to detect the early warning
signals, so that timely and effective public health actions can be initiated in response to
health challenges in the country at the Districts, State and National level.
Mandate/ Objectives


• Integration and decentralization of surveillance activities through establishment of
surveillance units at Centre, State and District level.
Human Resource Development – Training of State Surveillance Officers, District
•
Surveillance Officers, Rapid Response Team and other Medical and Paramedical
staff on principles of disease surveillance.
Information Communication Technology - for collection, collation, compilation,
•
analysis and dissemination of data.
Strengthening of public health laboratories.
•



Programme Components


• Integration and decentralization of surveillance activities through establishment of
surveillance units at Centre, State and District level.



152
---
• Human Resource Development – Training of State Surveillance Officers, District
Surveillance Officers, Rapid Response Team and other Medical and Paramedical
staff on principles of disease surveillance.
• Use of Information Communication Technology for collection, collation,
compilation, analysis and dissemination of data.
• Strengthening of public health laboratories.
• Inter sectoral Co-ordination for zoonotic diseases
Type of Surveillance


• Syndromic: Information of diseases on the basis of clinical pattern by paramedical
personnel and members of community.
• Presumptive: Diagnosis made on typical history, pattern and clinical examination
by medical officers
• Confirmed: Clinical diagnosis by medical officer confirmed by positive laboratory
investigation.
Five-year Strategic plan for IDSP-IHIP


Building on the Vision and SWOT analysis this section proposes a time-bound road
map for institutionalization of the IDSP-IHIP within the MOHFW and the NCDC. Four
distinct phases, some of which will run in parallel, are proposed for implementation
of this roadmap.
Institutionalization (2023-24):
During this phase, the core IT and programming including cloud storage will
shift from the WHO to the MOHFW/NCDC. The MOHFW has established a
new central health information unit/health observatory at the National Institute
of Health and Family Welfare to guide this process under the leadership of the
Ministry’s e-Health division.
The MOHFW is in advanced stage of procuring services of an agency to operate
a dedicated Technical Support Unit (TSU) with about eighteen IT experts
including programmers, specialists in application development, data analytics
and AI to facilitate full institutionalization of IHIP within its domain.
Appropriate hardware and cloud servers need to be put in place quickly to
support this process. In addition, the 24/7 help services and backup support
systems should be sustained and further strengthened.
153
---
As this process moves forward, The IDSP CSU team needs to develop core in-
house skills to steer the process and effectively manage the TSU to ensure
timely delivery of services and products as per the contract. The WHO has
indicated its willingness to support this transition and provide required hand
holding support to IDSP till the systems get established and fully functional. A
transition team from WHO consisting of programmers, public health
specialists and experts in data analytics including could backup is placed at
the IDSP to facilitate this process.



Key performance Indicators:
• MOHFW approves financing plan for IHIP institutionalization and
scaleup- July 31,2023
• IDSP-IHIP TSU is fully in position by August 1, 2023
• Transition of IDSP-IHIP to MOHFW/NCDC fully accomplished by March
31, 2024



Expansion (2024-2025)
During this phase four specific areas of expansion will receive priority focus by
the IDSP CSU, NCDC and MOHFW.



First, sustained high level advocacy will be undertaken with remaining two
states (Kerala and West Bengal) to bring them on board to start real-time
reporting using IHIP. Continued engagement with all States and UTs will be
continued in this phase to sustain timely and high-quality reporting by public
sector units including effective use of automated alert systems to promptly
identify unusual health events/outbreaks, pinpoint vulnerable populations
through GIS to ensure a well-coordinated comprehensive response for
containment. The CSU supported by the Regional NCDCs will support
competency-based capacity building of States and District Surveillance Units
in data analytics and high-quality outbreak response including documentation
through weekly epidemiological bulletins. Back-up systems will be in place to
ensure there is no down time during system glitches (if any) thereby minimizing
risks of downtime.



154
---
Second, the introduction of innovations to augment engagement with the
private sector. Building on the ongoing options emerging from consultations
with the private sector a comprehensive engagement strategy including
financing for enhanced private sector participation in India’s disease
surveillance will be developed. After obtaining MOHFW endorsement and
budget, the private sector partnership strategy will be rolled out giving priority
to PMJAY hospitals, medical colleges and attached laboratories.



Third, continuation of ongoing data integration initiatives by linking more
national health programs and establish linkages with other One health
surveillance systems with the IHIP. There will be enhanced advocacy efforts to
engage program managers and policy makers of remaining national health
programs as well as improving case-based reporting by linking IHIP with ABHA
health records.
Fourth, establishing partnerships with other countries in South Asia region and
international peers by creating a joint learning network in disease surveillance
and applied epidemiology.



Key performance indicators:
• Increase in public sector reporting units meeting performance
parameters.
• Endorsement of Private sector strategy by MOHFW for rolling out of
private sector strategy by April 2024.
• Increase in % of selected private hospitals and laboratories reporting
regularly on IHIP.
• The IHIP will have linkages with National Animal Disease Surveillance
system.
• Number of State/District Surveillance officers having competency in
data analytics and implementing high-quality outbreak response.
• Increase in national health programs/ABHA digital health records
integrated with IHIP.
Consolidation: (2025-2028):
In this phase, the emphasis will be on consolidation of gains made and promote
efforts improve quality and consistency of real-time reporting by both public
155
---
and private sector players. Efforts will be made to further enhance private
sector engagement involving smaller hospitals and solo practitioners including
development of mobile applications for SOS reporting. The CSU will establish
performance bench marking system for the IHIP in consultation with states and
assess system performance during outbreaks/simulation exercises. The
feedback will be confidentially shared with states and additional hand holding
support will be provided to those lagging. Weekly IDSP-IHIP bulletin will be
published describing trends in priority diseases and syndromes including
morbidity and mortality with case studies on outbreak investigations.
Key performance indicators:
• IDSP-IHIP performance benchmarking system established through a
consultative process.
• Increase in private sector reporting with participation of smaller private
hospitals and solo practitioners in IHIP.
• Number performance appraisals/simulation exercise undertaken by
CSU IDSP.
• Number of new publications by the CSU, IDSP in peer reviewed
journals.



Innovation (2028 onwards):
By 2008 the IHIP system is expected to be fully stabilized, financing will be
sustained, and more emphasis will be given to system improvements and
introduction of new innovations in reporting and data analytics including
application of AI. In addition, linkages with nonhealthy information
systems/data bases such as animal health, climate change, water and
sanitation, population mobility etc. will be further enhanced.
Key performance indicators:
• Sustained financing for IDSP-IHIP by MOHFW.
• Number of new modules added to the IHIP to improve reporting.
• Mobile application introduced to improve reporting of health events by
citizens.
• Increase in number of non-health information systems integrated with IHIP.



156
---
Key syndromes and diseases under IDSP- IHIP, India

1. Only Fever >= 7 days
2. Only Fever < 7 days
3. Fever with Rash
4. Fever with Bleeding
5. Fever with Altered sensorium
6. Cough <= 2 weeks with fever
7. Cough <= 2 weeks without fever
8. Cough > 2 weeks with fever
9. Cough > 2 weeks without fever
10. Jaundice of < 4 weeks
11. Acute Flaccid Paralysis
12. Animal Bite - Snake Bite
13. Animal Bite - Dog Bite
14. Animal Bite – Others
15. Acute Diarrheal Disease
16. Acute Encephalitic Syndrome
17. Acute Hepatitis
18. ARI/Influenza Like Illness (ILI)
19. Severe Acute Respiratory Infection (SARI)
20. Dysentery
21. Anthrax
22. Chickenpox
23. Chikungunya
24. Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever
157
---
25. Dengue
26. Diphtheria
27. Human Rabies
28. Kayasanur Forest Disease
29. Leptospirosis
30. Malaria
31. Measles
32. Meningitis
33. Mumps
34. Pertussis
35. Scrub Typhus
36. Typhoid



Source: https://idsp.mohfw.gov.in/showfile.php?lid=7047 /
https://idsp.mohfw.gov.in/index.php



158
---
18
13

National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme

(NVBDCP)

The National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme (NVBDCP) is an umbrella
programme for prevention and control of vector borne diseases (VBDs), viz., Malaria,
Lymphatic Filariasis, Kala-azar, Dengue, Chikungunya and Japanese Encephalitis (JE).
These diseases pose major public health problems and hamper socio-economic
development. Generally, the rural, tribal and urban slum areas are inhabited mostly by
people of socio-economic groups who are more prone to develop VBDs and are
considered as high-risk groups.



About 75 million malaria cases and 0.8 million deaths were estimated annually during
pre-Independence era. Malaria morbidity and mortality had affected agriculture,
industrial development and national economy. Repeated attacks of malaria were
responsible for deterioration in mental and physical capabilities resulting into enormous
loss of productive man days. Global experience in malaria control and availability of the
cost-effective intervention measures for malaria control with use of insecticides in fifties
indicated that with their effective and efficient use, malaria could be controlled or even
eradicated within a short period. Considering this concept, after independence, a
centrally sponsored National Malaria Control Programme (NMCP) was launched in 1953
for malaria control in high endemic areas. This was modified in 1958 to a countywide
National Malaria Eradication Programme (NMEP) in view of spectacular success of
NMCP. The success achieved in preventing deaths due to malaria and also reducing
annual malaria incidence to an all-time low of 0.1 million cases by 1965 could not be
sustained because of various technical, administrative and financial constraints.
Resurgence of malaria became noticeable in 1976 with 6.47 million cases that
necessitated launching of the Modified Plan of Operation (MPO) in 1977 with the
immediate objectives to prevent deaths and to reduce morbidity due to malaria. MPO
successfully brought down annual incidence of malaria from 6.47 million (0.85 million P.
falciparum) in 1976 to 2.18 million cases (0.65 million P. falciparum) by 1984. The
developmental activities like rapid and unplanned urbanization, construction, river valley
projects, mega-industry, irrigation projects, etc. with deficient water management and
inadequate mosquito control provisions again led to increased malaria incidence.



159
---
Migration of population from endemic to other areas on account of such developmental
projects also increased malaria transmission.



A major outbreak of malaria was reported from Rajasthan in 1994 which led to high level
review by the then Prime Minister on 5th December, 1994. As a follow up of programme
review, an Expert Committee was constituted which submitted its report on 27th January,
1995. Based on the recommendations of the Expert Committee, a Malaria Action
Programme (MAP) 1995 was developed and disseminated to the states and Union
Territories for prioritizing the high-risk areas for implementation of revised strategy
accordingly. During this period outbreaks were also reported from other states like
Nagaland, Manipur, Gujarat Goa and Haryana. As a result of these outbreaks the annual
incidence of malaria reached up to 3.04 million cases in 1996. By adapting MAP with
focused approach and additional inputs provided to high endemic areas, the annual
incidence of malaria was brought down to 1.51 million cases by the year 2007.



To tackle malaria problem in high-risk areas other than North-Eastern (NE) states, an
“Enhanced Malaria Control Project (EMCP)’ with the assistance of World Bank was
implemented during 1997-2005 with additional inputs in human resource, effective
insecticidal spraying and IEC/BCC activities along with capacity building. The malaria
incidence reduced in the project areas significantly. The strategies were focused on
control of malaria; hence, the programme was changed from NMEP to National Anti-
Malaria Programme (NAMP) during the year 1998. To sustain the impact of this project,
124 high endemic districts in 9 states have been identified for additional inputs through
World Bank assisted Project in 2008 for a period of five years which is being implemented
from 2009.



In North Eastern states, malaria control activities were intensified with additional
financial supports provided under Global Fund supported Intensified Malaria Control
Projects (IMCP) from July 2005 to June 2010. The Global Fund Supports have been
extended through another Global Fund supported project Round 9 for a period of further
five years (from Oct 2010 to Sep.2015) to cover all 86 districts of seven North-Eastern
States.



160
---
The prevention and control of other vector borne diseases namely Lymphatic Filariasis,
Kala- azar, was also being dealt by the Directorate of NAMP in addition to need based
support for Japanese Encephalitis and Dengue. In view of synergies in prevention &
control of vector borne diseases including Japanese Encephalitis and Dengue, the
programme was renamed as National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme in the
year 2003 with the integration of three ongoing centrally sponsored schemes viz., NAMP,
NFCP and Kala-Azar Control Programme and converging prevention and control of JE and
Dengue. In the year 2006, Chikungunya re-emerged in country and was also brought
under purview of this Directorate since 2006.
Urban Malaria Scheme (UMS)


The implementation of control measures under erstwhile ‘NMEP’ showed reducing
malaria incidence in rural areas of the country till 1965, but at the same time increasing
trend of malaria was observed in some towns/ cities as a result of which, Madhok
Committee (1969) reviewed the problem and found that 10 urban areas in Andhra
Pradesh and Tamil Nadu contributed 11.2% of the total malaria cases in the two states
during 1963. The Committee felt that if effective antilarval measures were not undertaken
in urban areas, the proliferation of malaria cases from urban to rural areas might occur in
a bigger way in many states and recommended adequate central assistance for tackling
the problem. Accordingly, the ‘Urban Malaria Scheme’ was approved during 1971 as
100% centrally sponsored scheme which from 1979-80 was changed to 50:50 sharing
basis between central and state governments. The UMS scheme was scaled up in
phased manner by including 23 towns in 1971-72; 5 in 1972-73; 87 in 1977-78; 38 in
1978-79; 12 in 1979-80 and 17 in 1980-81 making total towns of 182. Since states have
the responsibility of providing human resource and infrastructure, the scheme could be
implemented only in 131 towns for which GoI is supplying antilarval. The drugs are made
available through states. At present Urban Malaria Scheme is protecting about 116
million people from malaria and other mosquito borne diseases in 131 towns.
National Filaria Control Programme (NFCP)


The programme was launched in 1955 to delimit the problem and implement the
treatment of microfilaria carriers and disease cases with Diethylcarbamazine tablets
along with anti-larval measures in urban areas. Filaria is endemic in 20 States/UTs except
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura, Sikkim, Jammu &
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab, Chandigarh, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand and
Delhi and NFCP activities are implemented through 206 control Units, 224 Filaria Clinics
and 22 Filaria Survey Units located in urban areas of endemic states. The programme has
161
---
undergone various paradigm shifts and revised the strategy. Currently the disease has
been targeted for elimination which is defined as “Microfilaria carrier rate less than 1%
and the children born after initiation of elimination activities are free from circulating
antigenemia (presence of adult filaria worm in human body)”. The strategy of elimination
is interruption of transmission by annual Mass Drug Administration (MDA) with DEC and
Albendazole to the population living at risk of LF excluding children below 2 years,
pregnant women and seriously ill persons. This programme is being implemented in 250
LF endemic districts since 2004.The anti-larval operations in 227 towns covered under
NFCP is continued and the budget of NFCP merged with UMS for this support. As per
National Health Policy 2002, LF is targeted for elimination by 2015.
Kala-azar Elimination Programme


Kala-azar was highly endemic in India during pre-DDT era and had affected economic
growth of country due to its high morbidity and mortality rates. Cyclic epidemics used to
occur with an inter-epidemic period of about 10 years or more. With the launching of
extensive insecticidal spraying under National Malaria which, Madhok Committee (1969)
reviewed the problem and found that 10 urban areas in Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu
contributed 11.2% of the total malaria cases in the two states during 1963. The
Committee felt that if effective antilarval measures were not undertaken in urban areas,
the proliferation of malaria cases from urban to rural areas might occur in a bigger way in
many states and recommended adequate central assistance for tackling the problem.
Accordingly, the ‘Urban Malaria Scheme’ was approved during 1971 as 100% centrally
sponsored scheme which from 1979-80 was changed to 50:50 sharing basis between
central and state governments. The UMS scheme was scaled up in phased manner by
including 23 towns in 1971-72; 5 in 1972-73; 87 in 1977-78; 38 in 1978-79; 12 in 1979-
80 and 17 in 1980-81 making total towns of 182. Since states have the responsibility of
providing human resource and infrastructure, the scheme could be implemented only in
131 towns for which GoI is supplying antilarval. The drugs are made available through
states. At present Urban Malaria Scheme is protecting about 116 million people from
malaria and other mosquito borne diseases in 131 towns.
National Filaria Control Programme (NFCP)


The programme was launched in 1955 to delimit the problem and implement the
treatment of microfilaria carriers and disease cases with Diethylcarbamazine tablets
along with anti-larval measures in urban areas. Filaria is endemic in 20 States/UTs except
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura, Sikkim, Jammu &
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab, Chandigarh, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand and
162
---
Delhi and NFCP activities are implemented through 206 control Units, 224 Filaria Clinics
and 22 Filaria Survey Units located in urban areas of endemic states. The programme has
undergone various paradigm shifts and revised the strategy. Currently the disease has
been targeted for elimination which is defined as “Microfilaria carrier rate less than 1%
and the children born after initiation of elimination activities are free from circulating
antigenemia (presence of adult filaria worm in human body)”. The strategy of elimination
is interruption of transmission by annual Mass Drug Administration (MDA) with DEC and
Albendazole to the population living at risk of LF excluding children below 2 years,
pregnant women and seriously ill persons. This programme is being implemented in 250
LF endemic districts since 2004.The anti-larval operations in 227 towns covered under
NFCP is continued and the budget of NFCP merged with UMS for this support. As per
National Health Policy 2002, LF is targeted for elimination by 2015.
Kala-azar Elimination Programme


Kala-azar was highly endemic in India during pre-DDT era and had affected economic
growth of country due to its high morbidity and mortality rates. Cyclic epidemics used to
occur with an inter-epidemic period of about 10 years or more. With the launching of
extensive insecticidal spraying under National Malaria.Control Programme/ National
Malaria Eradication Programme since 1953 and 1958 respectively, the disease declined
to negligible proportion due to collateral insecticidal benefit on Kala-azar vector,
Phlebotomus argentipes, with consequent interruption of transmission. However, there
was resurgence in the sixties and by seventies the; disease established itself in endemic
form in Bihar followed by West Bengal. In the absence of any organized control activity,
the disease slowly spread to several areas in these states. Considering the seriousness
of the problem, a centrally sponsored Kala-azar Control Programme was launched in
the year 1990-91. The disease has also been targeted for elimination by 2015 as per
tripartite agreement between India, Nepal and Bangladesh. Various initiatives have been
taken towards elimination of the disease.
Dengue, Chikungunya and JE


For prevention and control of these viral diseases, there were no separate programmes
but need based assistance and technical supports were being provided by the
Directorate. However, during 11th Plan period, separate budgeting was planned and
various initiatives were taken to prevent outbreaks and contain the disease by
strengthening surveillance, diagnosis, case management and awareness etc.



163
---
Entomological Surveillance

The three important components of vector borne disease transmission are causative
organism (parasite or pathogen), human being as host and the transmitting agent – the
vector. Not all the mosquitoes transmit the disease, hence the knowledge about the
capacity of disease-causing vectors to transmit disease and their predominance in terms
of time and space are very crucial to facilitate the decision about their control strategies.
Entomological surveillance covers all these aspects and for such entomological
surveillance, 72 zonal malaria offices were established in the country with support of
entomologists, insect collectors and support staff. The expenditure on this human
resource is met by the States from state resources. In addition, 16 Regional Offices for
Health & FW, GoI were also equipped with entomologists for carrying out entomological
activities in addition to other public health activities. Gradually, due to non-adherence of
due importance to the entomological work and inability to fill up many vacant posts by the
States, the progress on entomological surveillance has suffered. However, some states
like Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Maharashtra etc. have attached more
importance on zonal teams and strengthened them with entomologists and better
infrastructure supports. Presently out of 72 zones, only 50% are functional. To generate
latest information about various entomological parameters in the country for revising
prevention and control strategies against vectors at national, state and local level, the
entomological zones need to be strengthened with additional human resource and
infrastructure with basic minimum facilities like mobility support for field visits etc.
Objectives under NVBDCP:


During XI Plan, following objectives were enlisted:
• To prevent mortality due to Vector Borne Diseases Namely Malaria, Kala-azar,
Dengue/DHF and Japanese Encephalitis
• To reduce morbidity due to Malaria, Dengue/DHF, Chikungunya and Japanese
Encephalitis Elimination of Kala-azar and Lymphatic Filariasis.
In pursuance to achieve the objectives under NVBDCP, Government of India has taken
various initiatives and set the goal as under
• To reduce the case incidence including morbidity on account of malaria, dengue,
chikungunya and Japanese encephalitis by 50% by 2017,
• To achieve elimination of Kala-azar and lymphatic filariasis by 2015.



164
---
Initiatives taken by GoI

The programme has also been subsumed under National Rural Health Mission (NRHM)
to improve the availability of services and access to health care to people, especially for
those residing in rural areas, the poor, women and children.
Malaria:


• Strengthening of Human Resource by providing Contractual male Multi-Purpose
Workers (MPW), Lab. Technicians, District Vector Borne Disease Consultants,
Malaria Technical Supervisor (MTS) and Involvement of ASHAs in high malaria
endemic districts for diagnosis & treatment by imparting training and providing them
performance based incentive @ Rs.5 for preparing blood slide, Rs.20 for complete
treatment of malaria positive cases detected through Rapid Diagnostic Test (RDT) and
Rs.50 for complete treatment of malaria positive case detected by microscopy, in
identified high malaria endemic districts.
• Up-scaling use of RDT in the periphery through peripheral health workers and involving
ASHAs.
• Expansion of effective drug – Artemisinin-based Combination Therapy (ACT) for all
falciparum cases in the entire country (extending to village level).
• Up-scaling of use of Long-Lasting Insecticidal Nets (LLIN) in high malaria endemic
areas supported under externally assisted projects. Focused intervention in high
malaria endemic districts with intensified supervision and monitoring.
• Identification of Sentinel surveillance hospital in high malaria endemic districts with
strengthening of referral services for management of severe cases of malaria and
avert malaria deaths. Dengue & Chikungunya:
• A Long-Term Action Plan was developed and sent to the States in 2007. Further in
2011, the Mid Term Plan for prevention and control of dengue has been developed
which was approved by Committee of Secretaries (CoS) under the chairpersonship of
Cabinet Secretary on 26.05.11.
• Diagnostic facilities have been increased from 170 Sentinel Surveillance Hospitals
(SSH) to 311 which are linked to 14 Apex Referral Laboratories.
• Introduced ELISA based NS1 tests (antigen based) which can detect a case from the
1st day of disease in addition to existing Mac ELISA test (antibody based) which can
detect a case only after 5th day of the disease.
• Monitoring of vector population in vulnerable areas.
• With the initiative of GOI, NIV field Unit at Allapuzha, Kerala has been established to
strengthen the surveillance of Arbo-viral diseases in the State.
165
---
• Capacity building for the medical officers in case management.
• Intensive social mobilization campaigns through IEC/BCC activities and community
participation in reducing breeding of mosquitoes.
Japanese Encephalitis (JE):


• Vaccination for Japanese Encephalitis under Routine Immunization in endemic
districts.
• Special vaccination campaign in 7 districts of Uttar Pradesh and 2 districts of Assam.
• Strengthening of Sentinel Surveillance Hospitals for diagnosis of JE cases and
treatment facilities at peripheral level.
• Strengthening of trained manpower.
• Involvement of Medical Colleges in AES/JE control programme.
• JE sub-office of Regional Office for Health & Family Welfare (ROH&FW) which is
manned by Public Health Specialist has been established in Gorakhpur.
• GOI has also established Vector Borne Disease Surveillance Unit (VBDSU) at BRD
Medical College, Gorakhpur for taking timely preventive measures.
• With the initiative of GOI, NIV field Unit at Gorakhpur has been established for
detection and isolation of non-JE viruses.
• A model action plan to strengthen public health measures for prevention and control
of JE/AES was developed at Kushinagar, Uttar Pradesh under the chairmanship of
DGHS, GoI in consultation with state health authorities and other stakeholders and
same is under implementation.
• Following the visit of Honorable Union Minister of Health & Family Welfare to
Gorakhpur, it was suggested to evolve a multi-pronged strategy towards prevention
and control of JE/AES which resulted in the formation of Group of Ministers (GoM)
constituted on 4th Nov. 2011. The recommendations of GoM have been approved by
the cabinet for establishing National Programme for prevention & control of JE/AES in
60 high priority districts of 5 endemic states namely Assam, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh,
Tamil Nadu and West Bengal.
Kala-azar:


• Up-scaling use of new diagnostic tools i.e. Rapid diagnostic test. Expansion of
oral drug Miltefosine as the first line of treatment to all endemic districts in a
phased manner.
• Incentives to Patient for loss of wages during the period of treatment.
• Free diet support to patient and one attendant.



166
---
• Incentive to Kala-azar activist / health volunteer / ASHA for referring a suspected
case and ensuring complete treatment.
• Support to states for engaging 31 VBD Consultants and 186 Kala-azar Technical
Supervisors (KTS) in 46 districts under World Bank Supported Project.
Elimination of Lymphatic Filariasis:


• Dissemination of guidelines for MDA and other technical aspects. Capacity
building of states/districts and PHC.
• Prototype IEC material to all LF endemic states/UTs.
• Cash assistance for various activities towards LF elimination.
• Supply of drugs to all the endemic states. (This has been decentralized during
2011 to be procured by the state out of cash grant provided by GoI.



Source: Operational Guidelines of NVBDCP /
https://ncvbdc.mohfw.gov.in/Doc/Annual-report-NVBDCP-2014-15.pdf



167
---
14
14

National Leprosy Eradication Programme (NLEP)


National Leprosy Eradication Programme (NLEP), India is a Centrally Sponsored
Scheme under the umbrella of National Health Mission (NHM). The primary goal of the
Programme is to detect the of leprosy cases at an early stage and to provide complete
treatment at free of cost, in order to prevent the occurrence of disabilities in the persons
affected and stop the transmission of disease at the community level. The Programme
also aims to spread awareness about the disease and reduce stigma attached with the
disease
Leprosy is a chronic infectious disease caused by the bacteria M. Leprae. It can produce
disability which is the main cause of stigma. The bacteria enter and exit the body
through the respiratory tract. The incubation period is long and variable (Average 5-7
years).
Objective


• Reducing the Burden of Leprosy cases & improving the quality of services.
Integration of Leprosy Services with Primary Health Care System.
•
Referral Services & long-term care of cases.
•
Prevention and Management of impairment and disability.
•
Improving community awareness and involvement, Rehabilitation & Stigma
•
Reduction.
PROGRAMME STRATEGY


To achieve the objectives of the plan, the main strategies to be followed are:
• Strengthening of integration of leprosy services through General Health Care
system.
• Early detection & complete treatment of new leprosy cases.
• Carrying out house hold contact survey for early detection of hidden cases like
FLC, ACD & RS.



168
---
• Involvement of Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA) in the detection Follow-
up & completion of treatment of Leprosy cases in time.
• Strengthening of Disability Prevention & Medical Rehabilitation (DPMR) services.
• Information, Education & Communication (IEC) & IPC activities in the community
to improve self reporting to Primary Health Centre (PHC) and reduction of stigma.
• Intensive monitoring and supervision at all levels.
To make NLEP planning compliant with NHM guidelines, the following 8 results are to be
achieved:
1. Improved early case detection.
2. Improve case management.
3. Stigma reduction.
4. Development of Leprosy expertise sustained.
5. Research supported evidence base programme practices. 6. Monitoring
Supervision and Evaluation system improved.
6. Increased participation of Persons affected by Leprosy in Society.
7. Involvement of community in accepting persons affected by leprosy.
8. Programme management ensured.
PROGRAMME COMPONENTS


The following components are under NLEP:-
• Case Detection and Management – Active Case Detection & Regular Surveillance
(ACD&RS), FLC, PEP etc.
• Disability Prevention and Medical Rehabilitation – RCS, MCR &Self-care Kits
distribution to the patients etc.
• Information, Education and Communication (IEC) including Behaviour Change
Communication (BCC)
• Capacity building
• Programme Management
• PPP activity.



169
---
NLEP Emblem
Symbolizes beauty and purity in
lotus:
leprosy patient can be a useful
Leprosy can be cured and a
member of the society in the form
normal fore-finger and the shape
of apartially affected thumb: a
of house:
the symbol of hope and optimism
in arising sun_
CLTRI Online training DLO_ Sep 2021
NLEP Milestones (1)
Year PROGRAMME MILESTONES Keyimplementations
Before Gandhi Memorial Leprosy Survey: Education and Treatment (SET) programme
Precursor for NLCP and organized leprosy control
1955 Foundation (GMLF) Wardha Hind seivices
Kusht Nivaran Sangh NGOs
1955 National Leprosy Control Programme Monotherapy
LCU_ 45Lpopl SET centres PR 5/1000 Dapsone
(NLCP)
1983 National Leprosy Eradication Introduction of MDT in Phases. initially high
Programme (NLEP endemic districts
Urban leprosy centres Mobile treatment units
1991 World Health Assembly resolution Eliminate leprosy as PHP at global level by the year
2000 [PR < 1/10000 popl]
44.9
1993 First phase World Bank supported MDT made available to all registered patients
2000 project NLEP extended to all districts in the country
Midterappraisal of NLEP (1997)
1998 04 Modified Leprosy Elimination Increasing awareness about leprosy: training to GHC
Campaign (MLEC) personnel and to detect the hidden cases
SAPEL (2000) [> 1 Million cases detected]
Difficult, inaccessible hard to reach population
170
---
NLEP Milestones
Year PROGRAMME MILESTONES Key implementations
2001 - World Bank supported project II Decentralization of NLEP responsibilities. integration
under general health care system: training GHC
04 phase personnel. Suveillance for early diagnosis with prompt
MDT awareness for voluntary reporting
2002 National Health Policy 2002 NHP set the goalBetter monitoring of NLEP with recording andof leprosy elimination by 2005
Simplified Information System SIS
introduced reporting made easier for GHC staff:
2004- Block Leprosy Awareness Campaign High priority districts & blocks with an aim to increase
05 BLAC) the awareness forself reporting. detection of hidden
cases With capacity building of service providers
Dec Leprosy elimination as Public Health PR <1/10000 (0.95) elimination declared at the National
2005 Problem level
2005 National Rural Health Mission Vertical programme integrated with general health care
(NRHM) system under NRHM
Dist. Nucleus Team (DNT) - Health societies
Urban leprosy control programme
NLEP Milestones
Year PROGRAMME MILESTONES Key implementations
2006 Disability Prevention & Medical Guidelines for management at primary: secondaly and
Rehabilitation (DPMR) introduced tertiary level.
2012 12th plan [2012 _ 2017] Special action plan for 209 high endemic districts in 16
States UTs
Target to reduce the visible disabilities <] per 10.00.000
population in by 2020.
2014 Upgraded Simplified Infonation
System (USIS) implementation makingULF formats introduced for uniformity and better decision
2016- Newer initiatives in the programme LCDC _ 14 day active case detection campaign in high
17 Three Pronged strategy endemic districts
Chemoprophylaxis FLC nOn-endemic districts
Special plan for hard to reach areas
SDR implementation toeligible contacts of new cases
Immunotherapy MIP Vaccine as pilot phase
2017 Sparsh Leprosy Awareness Increasing the awareness. addressing high level of stigma &
Campaign (SLAC) discrimination Convening special Grama sabha meeting
171
---
NLEP_ Milestones (4)
Year PROGRAMME MILESTONES Key implementations
2017 Newer initiatives: Real timemonitoring of leprosy patients across
18 Introduction of - NIKUSTH" the country and facilitating better monitoring and
ASHA based Surveillancefor Leprosy evaluation of NLEP
Suspects (ABSULS) ABSULS active surveillance of leprosy
suspects with prioritizing leprosy case detection
by ASHA & treatment followup
2018 Sparsh Leprosy Elimination Campaign LCDC . SLAC
Enhancement of recently launched initiatives
19 (SLEC) G2D target to reduce <lcase Million & reduce
150th Birth anniversary of Mahatma backlog of RCS cases
Gandhiji Grade II disability investigation
2018 WHO Guidelines for Diagnosis. treatment Evidence based recomnendations in accordance
-19 and prevention of Leprosy with procedures established by the WHO
Guidelines Review Commnittee
Independent Evaluation of NLEP by WHO
(2019)

Source: Operational guidelines of NLEP/NHM and https://cltri.gov.in/



172
---
15
15

National Tuberculosis Elimination Programme (NTEP)


Introduction

The National Tuberculosis Programme of India (NTP) was initiated in 1962 and was
originally designed for domiciliary treatment, using self- administered standard drug
regimens. A combined review of the programme in 1992 concluded that the NTP could
not achieve its objectives of TB control and hence, on the recommendations of an expert
committee, a revised strategy to control TB was pilot-tested in 1993. A full-fledged
programme was started in 1997 and rapidly expanded with excellent results. This Revised
National Tuberculosis Control Programme (RNTCP) that uses the DOTS (Directly
Observed Treatment, Short-course chemotherapy) strategy achieved country coverage
on World TB Day, 24th March, 2006. The programme has achieved several milestones
related to diagnosis and treatment services of TB since 2006. Since inception in 1997 and
up to December 2015, more than 19 million patients were initiated on treatment and
more than 3.5 million additional lives have been saved.
National AIDS Control Programme and RNTCP have developed a “National framework of
joint TB/HIV Collaborative Activities”. Nationwide coverage of services for programmatic
management of drug-resistant TB, which began in 2007, has been achieved in March
2013. The Government is also proactively engaging with private practitioners, a number
of private organizations, NGOs and professional bodies like Indian Medical Association,
in order to enhance notification of TB cases. Central TB Division, in collaboration with
National Informatics Centre, has developed a case-based web-based platform-
‘Nikshay’ in 2012, which has now been scaled up nationally.
The Standards for TB Care in India (STCI) have been published jointly by RNTCP and World
Health Organization in 2014, which lays down uniform standards for TB care for all
stakeholders in the country.
About NTEP:


National TB Elimination Programme is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme being
implemented under the aegis of National Health Mission with resource sharing between
the State Governments and the Central Government. It is managed by the Central TB
Division (CTD), the technical arm of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare



173
---
(MoH&FW). The CTD is assisted by six national level institutes, namely the National TB
Institute in Bengaluru, the National Institute of TB and Respiratory Disease in New Delhi,
the National Institute of Research in Tuberculosis in Chennai and the JALMA Institute of
Leprosy and other Mycobacterial Diseases, Agra, BMHRC, Bhopal, and RMRC,
Bhubaneshwar. Fourteen committees have been constituted at national level to provide
technical guidance for programme implementation.
a. At the State level, State Health Secretary and MD-NHM are responsible for
programme implementation in the State where in the planning, training, supervising
and monitoring of the programme in their respective states is as per the guidelines of
the State Health Society and CTD. State TB Training and Demonstration Centre
(STDC) supports the State TB Cell in most of the larger states. State Drug Store (SDS)
has been established for the effective management of anti-TB drug logistics. The
STDC is supported by the State TB Forums for community engagement, State level
PMDT committee for implementation guidance and review of PMDT, State level TB
comorbidity coordination committee and Technical Working Group for HIVTB for
smooth TB- comorbidity coordination. Nodal Drug Resistant TB centres are
established for management of drug-resistant TB with newer drugs, adverse drug
reactions and as referral unit.
b. The district is the key level for the management of the primary health care services.
The District Tuberculosis Centre (DTC) is the nodal point for all TB control activities in
the district and has the overall responsibility of management of NTEP at the district
level as per the programme guidelines and the guidance of the District Health Society.
District level TB comorbidity coordination committee is in-place for smooth TB
comorbidity coordination.
c. At the sub-district level End TB activities are implemented through a Tuberculosis
Unit (TU) which consists of a designated Medical Officer-Tuberculosis Control (MO-
TC) supported by two full-time NTEP contractual supervisory staff exclusively for
tuberculosis work - a Senior TB Treatment Supervisor (STS) and a Senior TB
Laboratory Supervisor (STLS). The TU is generally aligned with the administrative
blocks in the district with 1 STS /TU at NHM block or urban area (approx. pop 1.5-2.5
l) and 1 STLS /5 lac population (~ 5 DMCs).
d. Peripheral Health Level: For the purpose of NTEP, a Peripheral Health Institution
(PHI) is a health facility which is manned by at least a medical officer. At this level
there are public or private (including NGO supported) dispensaries, PHCs, CHCs,



174
---
referral hospitals, major hospitals, specialty clinics or hospitals, medical colleges.
Some of these PHIs may also serve as a Tuberculosis Diagnostic Centers (TDCs),
previously called Designated Microscopy Centre (DMC), which is the most peripheral
level laboratory in the NTEP structure. Through these TDCs, tuberculosis case-finding
activities take place. Treatment may be initiated at the PHIs and in some instances
(such as drug-resistant TB) where initiation is at higher levels, the treatment of the
patients may continue at PHI level. For establishment of a TDC in the lab of a PHC, it
must have adequate physical infrastructure, binocular microscope and a trained LT.
e. Ayushman Arogya Mandirs (AAMs): Under Ayushman Bharat, around 1, 50,000
existing Sub- Health Centres (SHCs) and Primary Health Centers (PHCs) are being
transformed to Ayushman Arogya Mandirs (AAMs) to deliver Comprehensive Primary
Health Care (CPHC), that is universal and free to users, with a focus on wellness and
the delivery of an expanded range of services close to the community. The wide range
of services provided at these Ayushman Arogya Mandirs will encompass maternal and
child health services, communicable and non-communicable diseases, services for
the elderly and palliative care including free essential drugs and diagnostic services.
For the treatment of tuberculosis, it will serve as the last level of healthcare facility for
continuation of treatment and for receiving ancillary drugs to support TB treatment.
f. Program Implementation Plan and Planning Process: As with other components of
NHM, financial support to NTEP is provided through the Program Implementation Plan
(PIP) mechanism of the National Health Mission. NTEP / NHM follow a Bottom-Up
approach for planning and budgeting. The process begins at the district level by NTEP
preparing the district PIP at the District TB Centre (DTC) which gets incorporated into
the integrated District Health Action Plan (IDHAP) which is further sent to the state
level to form the State PIP. The PIP indicates the physical targets and budgetary
estimates in accordance with the approved pattern of assistance under the NHM. This
will cover all aspects of activities required to be carried out under NTEP in one
financial year. The State PIPs are approved by the Union Secretary of Health and
Family Welfare, as Chairperson of the EPC, based on appraisal by the National
Programme Coordination Committee (NPCC) which is chaired by the Mission Director
and includes representatives of the State, Technical and Programme divisions of the
MoHFW, other Departments and Ministries, as required. The approved Record of
Proceeding (ROP) includes Central as well as State share, and includes cash as well
as commodity component. The preparation of the PIP follows a standardized
template specified by the NHM.
175
---
g. Collaborative activities with other NHM Components: NTEP work in collaboration
with other Programmes such as the National AIDS Control Organization (NACO) and
the National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes,
Cardiovascular diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS). Bi-directional screening for HIV and
Tuberculosis, along with testing for Diabetes Mellitus is offered for all TB patients.
Testing for co-morbidities is part of the bouquet of services provided to patients being
treated under NTEP, in order to provide comprehensive care and support.
h. NTEP adopts the Health Systems Approach of the NHM, as per which the entire health
system machinery works together to achieve common goals of improved health,
better responsiveness and better financial protection to the patients. Human
resources and infrastructure of the general health system and also of medical
colleges are utilized to achieve maximum utility. For example, many drug-resistant TB
treatment centres are situated in medical colleges, with medical college staff and
infrastructure playing crucial role in the treatment of drug-resistant TB. Likewise,
laboratory technicians from the general health system pool are re-appropriated for
work under NTEP; a single counsellor in some low work-load districts/ blocks
provides counselling support across various disease programmes, including
Tuberculosis.



TB epidemiology in India


a. TB Incidence:
In 2019, India notified 24,04,815 (M-1511309, F-891210, TG-2296) patients,
representing a 51% percent increase in total notifications as compared to 2015. The total
estimated TB incidence in 2018 was 199 patients per 100,000 persons (Male – 239,
Female – 156) (95% Confidence Limits [95%CL]: 136–273). TB incidence appears to be
on the decline; with an 8.3 percent rate decrease since 2015 (2015 ir: 217; 95%CL: 112–
355). These trends appear to be consistent among new, previously treated and HIV
positive patients (Figure 4).
Trends in annual number of notified TB patients, estimated TB incidence among new,
previously treated (relapse), and HIV positive – India: 2000–2019.
Source: World Health Organization. WHO Global TB Report, 2019. Data for 2019 from
NTEP



176
---
60
1 505 40
2 30 26.9
20
21.6
2 10
2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019
Total TB Incidence New & Relapse TB case notified HIV positive TB Incidence

It should be noted that current estimates of incidence rely on the extent of under-
reporting (assumed at 40 percent based on expert opinion). However, recent analysis of
private drug sales data suggested that that an enormous number of TB patients are
seeking treatment in the private sector (1.2–5.3 million patients per year). While it is
unknown how many of the patients studied were over-diagnosed, there are concerns that
the true incidence may be much higher than has been estimated, despite consistent and
stable trends in drug sales. The pending results of the national prevalence survey holds
promise to recalibrate our assumptions and calculate more accurate burden estimates.
b. TB Prevalence
Direct estimates of TB prevalence have not been obtained since the first nationwide
prevalence survey in 1955–1958. Current estimates for national TB prevalence are
mathematically derived from previously conducted state-based surveys. In 2009,
national TB prevalence was estimated at 301 per 100,000 population.
Nationwide national prevalence survey has begun (September 2019), and results from
the 500,000 persons, 625 survey sites are likely to be available in 2021. In the interim, a
recent publication summarized recent sub-national surveys and revealed wide
geographic variation and discordance with the corresponding annual notification rates
(Table 4).
c. TB Mortality
The estimated mortality rate in India declined from almost 58 deaths per lakh population
(HIV-negative) in 2000 to 32 per lakh in 2018, while the global mortality rate declined at
the same rate, from 30 per lakh to 16 per lakh.



177
---
Vision, Goals and Targets of NSP

The NSP proposes bold strategies with commensurate resources to rapidly decline TB
incidence and mortality in India by 2025 to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals
on its march towards attaining the vision of a TB-free India.
VISION


TB-Free India with zero deaths, disease and poverty due to TB
GOAL


To achieve a rapid decline in burden of TB, morbidity and mortality to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals of 80% reduction in incidence and 90% reduction in
deaths by 2025; five years earlier of the global targets.
Objectives


Objective 1: Build, strengthen and sustain enabling policies, empowered institutions,
multi-sectoral collaborations, engaged communities, and human resources with
enhanced capacities to create a supportive ecosystem which accelerates PREVENT –
DETECT – TREAT pillars to END TB.



Objective 2: Prevent the emergence of TB in vulnerable populations.



Objective 3: Early identification of presumptive TB, at the first point of contact (private or
public sectors), and prompt diagnosis using high sensitivity diagnostic tests to provide
universal access to quality TB diagnosis including drug resistant TB in the country.



Objective 4: Initiate and sustain, equitable access to free high quality TB treatment, care
and support services responsive to the community needs thereby protecting the
population especially the poor and vulnerable from TB related morbidity and mortality.



The NSP strategic framework


Significant progress has been made towards achieving the objectives laid down in the
NSP 2017-25, especially in the last 3 years. The 2019 JMM provided NTEP with direction
on the way forward to accelerate the progress towards ending TB. It recommended
178
---
comprehensively deployed interventions to accelerate the decline in TB incidence, to
more than 6 - 7 % annually to achieve the 2030 SDG by 2025. The prerequisites for
moving towards ending TB and ultimately TB elimination have been integrated into the
four strategic pillars of BUILD - PREVENT - DETECT – TREAT to accelerate the
achievement of programme goals. The following table describes the renewed approach
to END TB in the country.
Table: Pillars, Objectives, Strategic area and Interventions in the NSP 2021-25
PILLAR 1: B U I L D, S T R E N G T H E N A N D S U S T A I N A N E N A B L I N
G E N V I R O N M E N T F O R T B E L I M I N A T I O N
Objective 1. Build, strengthen and sustain enabling policies, empowered
institutions, multi-sectoral collaborations, engaged communities, and human
resources with enhanced capacities to create a supportive ecosystem which
accelerates PREVENT – DETECT – TREAT pillars of the NSP
S R A T E G I C A R E A : I N T E R V E N T I O N S
1 . 1 to 1 . 1 4
1.1. Ensure a fully funded 1.1.1 Improve health financing
NSP 1.1.2 Improve financial flow
1.2. Enhance the human 1.2.1 Create and fill key positions in line with the scope
resource and its of new NSP activities
management within 1.2.2 Update the staffing structures for NTEP staff in
the NTEP the states.
1.2.3 Training
1.2.4 Strengthening the capacity of the STDCs to
execute key functions
1.3. Increase efficiency 1.3.1. National TB Policy and TB Bill
and effectiveness of 1.3.2. Expedite setting up of prescribed governance
governance and structures
programme 1.3.3. Extend the governance and management
management structures to the States and District
mechanisms for TB 1.3.4. Strengthen governance for private sector
elimination engagement
1.4. Strengthen and scale- 1.4.1. Continue to Improve TB notification from private
up the existing private healthcare providers
sector engagement



179
---
mechanisms with 1.4.2. Strengthen collaboration with corporate
new additionalities to hospitals
enlist greater pvt 1.4.4. Improve access to diagnostics for TB patients
sector participation notified from private sector
and programme reach 1.4.5. Improve access to drug for TB patients notified
from private sector
1.4.6. Enhance Surveillance and Quality improvement
1.4.7. Expand ICT support to support the TB patients
and private provider
1.4.8. Involvement of AYUSH Providers
1.4.9. Involvement of Health Establishments under
other line Ministries, PSUs, Corporates, etc.
1.5. Expedite multi 1.5.1. Adopt a National multisectoral accountability
sectoral collaboration framework to end TB
with a focus on the 1.5.2. Drive multisectoral action, based on the right to
implementation of health, via a TB Elimination Board/Committees and
multisectoral state/local counterparts, and inter-sectoral
accountability committees
framework 1.5.3. Strengthen the Inter ministerial committee
1.5.4. Actions to ensure major national
initiatives/programmes are and can contribute to
ending TB
1.5.5. Undertake mapping of key populations and
interventions
1.6. Support to create 1.6.1. Amplify and scale up active engagement of
empowered and communities affected by Tuberculosis, especially TB
engaged survivors and key populations
communities to fight 1.6.2. Expand community participation in the mission
TB to end TB
1.6.3. Build new need-based collaborations and
strengthening current partnerships at national and sub-
national levels with Community-Based and Civil
Society Organizations
1.6.4. Institute mechanisms at various levels for
ensuring accountability of the health system to the
180
---
community and making the programme responsive to
the community needs.
1.6.5. Explore innovative resource mobilization
strategies for community engagement, including but
not limited to leveraging CSR funds.
1.6.6. Build a knowledge base and sharing of
experiences and good practices with potential for
replication in different settings
1.6.7. Build capacity of community structures and
institutions for supporting different facets of TB
elimination
1.7. Advocacy and 1.7.1. Engage in high-level advocacy with the National
strategic Parliament and State Assemblies
communication 1.7.2. Conduct round-the-year communication
campaigns that are strategically designed in close
collaboration with affected communities to influence
positive behaviors and improved awareness.
Implement, monitor and evaluate the impact of
communication campaigns
1.8. Enhance and 1.8.1. Build and mentor a strong surveillance,
strengthen epidemiology, and monitoring and evaluation workforce.
surveillance, 1.8.2. Use local data for local action; create process
monitoring and indicators that are vital for larger outcomes.
evaluation of NTEP 1.8.3. Develop user-friendly, virtual “workspaces” and
data visualizations to prompt local public health action.
1.8.4. Accelerate alignment with all health information
systems and applications.
1.8.5. Phase out paper-based recording systems.
1.9. Research 1.9.1. Improve the institutional structure and capacity
for TB research
1.9.2. Address issues related to Operational Research
and Implementation Science 1.9.3. Undertake
research in key priority areas like Case Finding,



181
---
treatment, and prevention among different high-risk
populations
1.10. Strengthen 1.10.1 Create an alternative back-up mechanism to
procurement and speed up procurement of drugs and diagnostics
supply chain 1.10.2 Develop E-Pharmacy / commerce platforms to
management enable door-step delivery of drugs
1.10.3 Strengthening of procurement and supply chain
management systems by upgrading institutional and
individual capacities
1.10.4 Increase uptake of Digital Technologies for SCM
1.10.5 Create mechanisms for enabling the availability
of NTEP drugs to patients in the private sector
1.10.6 Strengthening of Nikshay Aushadi
1.10.7 Improve supply chain efficiency and
effectiveness
1.10.8 Strengthen and upgrade drug store infrastructure
at state, district and block levels
1.10.9 Set up state level PSM units
1.10.10 Build capacity at state level
1.10.11 Establish / strengthen transportation system
through third party logistics
1.10.12 Prepare and execute mechanism for thorough
upkeep and uptime maintenance of Mobile Medical
Vans & Equipment
1.10.13 Strengthen supervision and M&E in PSM
1.10.14 Establish Policies for decentralized write off up
to 2% of cost of annual supply for expired drugs and
commodities
1.11. Digital information 1.11.1 Strengthen Central TB Division, to be equipped
ecosystem for TB with resources to develop and maintain IT Systems,
care manage and use real time information for program
management
1.11.2 Systems for monitoring TB Epidemiology,
information dissemination and capacity building



182
---
1.11.3 Strengthen National TB Call Centre for provision
of comprehensive inbound and outbound call services.
1.12. Secure cutting-edge 1.12.1. Strengthen the TSN and make TA
technical assistance responsive to the emerging TB landscape in India.
1.12.2. Extend TA to other line ministries
1.12.3. Expedite the establishment of the TSU’s for
high priority States
1.12.4. Create a platform/mechanism to enlist and
provide information on the available TA subject experts
1.13. Address human rights 1.13.1. Provide equitable, rights-based TB
and gender related services for women, men and transgender persons by
barriers in access to adopting a gender-specific programmatic approach at
TB services all levels
1.13.2. Mobilize, empower and engage women,
men and transgender persons in the TB response at the
health system and community levels
1.13.3 Create empowered community monitoring
system for ensuring human right centric care for people
affected by TB.
1.14. TB care in the era of 1.14.1. Leverage the momentum generated on
COVID-19 : Build a anti-COVID-19 response across institutions, policies,
resilient, responsive regulations and behavioral risk communication for
and agile NTEP to NTEP.
respond to complex 1.14.2. Pandemic preparedness actions
emergencies 1.14.3. Pandemic response
1.14.4 Post pandemic restoration response
PILLAR 2: P R E V E N T
Objective 2: Prevent the emergence of TB in vulnerable populations using a
combination of biomedical, behavioral, social and structural targeted interventions.
S R A T E G I C A R E A : I N T E R V E N T I O N S
2 . 1 to 2. 2
2.1. TB Preventive Treatment 2.1.1 Saturation of TPT coverage and integrated
(TPT) and Programmatic monitoring of TPT among PLHIV, contacts of TB patient
management of TPT and other target populations



183
---
2.1.2 Introduce and expand phase wise LTBI
management coverage among adolescent and adult
contacts in households, proximity contacts, vulnerable
populations and workplace contacts
2.1.3 Introduce and expand coverage of newer and
effective TPT diagnostics and shorter TB preventive
treatment regimens
2.1.4 Expedite research and fast-tracking adoption of
new products and innovations
2.2. Scale up TB - infection 2.2.1 Enhance policy support and human and financial
control (TB-IC) resources to mainstream Airborne Infection Control
measures at home, (AIC)
community, and health 2.2.2 Strengthen AIC through effective implementation
care facilities of administrative, environmental measures and
personal protection measures at healthcare,
community and workplace settings
2.2.3 Strengthened and responsive system for
surveillance of TB among health workers
PILLAR 3 : D E T E C T A L L
Objective 3: Early identification of presumptive TB, at the first point of contact
(private or public sectors), and prompt diagnosis using high sensitivity diagnostic
tests to provide universal access to quality TB diagnosis including drug resistant TB
in the country.
S R A T E G I C A R E A : I N T E R V E N T I O N S
3 . 1 t o 3 . 3
3.1. Scale-up free, high 3.1.1. Enhance the use of novel and improved
sensitivity diagnostic strategies to enable diagnosis of latent as well as active
tests and algorithms TB (including DR TB)
3.1.2. Strengthen the laboratory and diagnostic
systems to shift from sputum microscopy to molecular
diagnostics for diagnosis of TB, in a phased manner
3.1.3 Strengthen efficient specimen transport
mechanisms



184
---
3.1.4 Establish and implement systems for monitoring
of quality assurance and time-bound delivery of
laboratory services
3.2. Intensify TB case finding 3.2.1 Create an Integrated diagnostic algorithm to
efforts through a whole detect all forms of TB (latent, active, and DR-TB)
of sector approach to 3.2.2. Integrate TB diagnosis with public health
cover all programmes laboratories at sub district levels within the existing
within the MOHFW and health system and decentralize molecular diagnostics
other line ministries to block levels for extensive outreach
3.3.3. Conduct predictive analysis for hot spot
identification and vulnerability mapping
3.3.4 Conduct systematic screening of high-risk /
vulnerable groups through outreach and community-
based approaches using digital x-rays and rapid and
more sensitive molecular diagnostics
3.3.5 Institute systematic screening for TB symptoms in
health care institutions/ OPDs including COVID
screening
3.3.6 Intensified contact tracing/investigation using
community-based and other approaches to cover
households, proximal contacts and workplace settings
and follow up
PILLAR 4: T R E A T A L L
Objective 4: Initiate and sustain, equitable access to free high quality TB treatment,
care and support services responsive to the community needs thereby protecting
the population especially the poor and vulnerable from TB related morbidity and
mortality.
S R A T E G I C A R E A I N T E R V E N T I O N S
4 . 1 t o 4 . 4
4.1. Strengthen treatment of 4.1.1. Continue with the current modalities for
DSTB treatment that include daily regimens for DSTB and
expand coverage among patients seeking care in the
private sector



185
---
4.1.2. Strengthen adherence monitoring and post
treatment follow up for the prevention of relapse and
development of drug resistance
4.1.3. Care cascade monitoring
4.1.4. Redesign Directly Observed Treatment (DOT)
modalities and expand options for adherence
monitoring and supervision through involvement of
Ayushman Arogya Mandirs and innovative digital tools
4.1.5. Strengthen Clinical management support
through tele-medicine and digital artificial intelligence
driven tools
4.1.6. Strengthen implementation and monitoring of
Pharmacovigilance for DS-TB and DR-TB
4.2. Expand and strengthen 4.2.1 Introduction and scale up of effective all oral
treatment and regimens with shortened duration
management of DRTB 4.2.2 Estimate burden and protocols for addressing
Non-tuberculous Mycobacteria (NTM)
4.2.3 Build capacity and linkages to existing programs
for palliative care and rehabilitation.
4.3. Address TB in priority 4.3.1. Common strategic 4.3.8. TB-Gender
populations and scale interventions for 4.3.9. TB-Pregnancy
up integrated action on strengthening TB care 4.3.10. TB in
TB and comorbidities services in priority Congregate
populations settings/incarcerated
4.3.2 Pediatric TB and TB population including
among Adolescent juveniles
population 4.3.11. TB-
4.3.3. Malnutrition and TB Geriatrics
4.3.4. Alcohol 4.3.12. TB-Mental
dependence/substance Health
use 4.3.13. TB-Hepatitis
4.3.5. Tobacco use 4.3.14. TB-Silicosis
4.3.6. TB – Diabetes 4.3.15. Tribal TB
4.3.7. TB-HIV 4.3.16. TB in urban
slums
186
---
4.3.17. TB among
migrants
4.3.18. TB among
Truckers, public transport
workers
4.3.19. TB among
TGs/MSMs/IDUs and Sex
Workers
4.3.20 TB and COVID-19
4.4. Strengthen and expand 4.4.1 Expand the coverage of treatment adherence
coverage of patient mechanisms for all TB patients.
support mechanisms 4.4.2 Provide social benefits to patients available under
NTEP and linkages to other relevant social support
schemes with line ministries
4.4.3 Initial Screening and review of data and
improvement of monitoring tools in Nikshay
4.4.4 Call Centre support for strengthening and
monitoring treatment adherence
4.5. Institutionalize 4.5.1 Undertake regular analysis of CHE through dip-
mechanisms to monitor stick studies, review missions and direct patient
Catastrophic Health feedback through national call center
Expenditures (CHE) in
persons affected by TB
Source: National Tuberculosis Elimination Programme: NATIONAL STRATEGIC
PLAN TO END TUBERCULOSIS IN INDIA 2020–25



187
---
16
16

National Programme for Prevention and Control of

Non-Communicable diseases (NP-NCD)

Burden of Non-Communicable Diseases

Global Scenario:
The global NCD burden remains unacceptably high. NCDs are responsible for 41 million
of the world’s annual deaths. 17 million of these deaths were premature (30 to 70 years).
Burden is greatest within low- and middle-income countries, where 77 percent of all NCD
deaths and 80% of premature deaths occurred. Among NCDs, the four top killers that
together account for more than 80% of all premature NCD deaths annually include
cardiovascular diseases (17·9 million), cancers (9.3 million), chronic respiratory diseases
(4.1 million), and diabetes (2.0 million).
Indian Scenario:
As per the WHO – NCD India profile - 2018, NCDs are estimated to account for 63% of
all deaths in country of which cardiovascular diseases lead with 27% overall mortality
cause followed by chronic respiratory diseases (11%), cancers (9%), diabetes (3%) and
others (13%).
Risk factors


Most NCDs are strongly associated with major risk factors such as:
1. Tobacco use (smoking and smokeless)
2. Alcohol use
3. Unhealthy diets
4. Insufficient physical activity
5. Air pollution (indoor and outdoor)
If the above risk factors are not managed/modified, they may lead to the following
biological risk factors:
1. Overweight/obesity
2. Raised blood pressure
3. Raised blood sugar
188
---
4. Raised total cholesterol/lipids
The other factors due to which an individual might develop NCDs are:
1. Stress
2. Hereditary factors
Objectives


The objectives of NP-NCD are as follows:
• Health promotion through behaviour change with involvement of community, civil
society, community-based organizations, media and development partners.
• Screening, early diagnosis, management, referral and follow-up at each level of
healthcare delivery to ensure continuum of care.
• Build capacity of health care providers at various levels for prevention, early
diagnosis, treatment, follow-up, rehabilitation, IEC/BCC, monitoring and
evaluation, and research.
• Strengthen supply chain management for drugs, equipment and logistics for
diagnosis and management at all health care levels.
• Monitoring, supervision and evaluation of programme through proper
implementation of uniform ICT application across India.
• To coordinate and collaborate with other programmes, departments/ministries,
civil societies.
Strategies of NP-NCD


Following are the strategies of the programme:
• Health promotion for prevention of NCDs and reduction of risk factors.
• Screening, early diagnosis, management, referral and follow up of common
NCDs.
• Capacity building of health care providers.
• Evidence-based standard treatment protocols.
• Uninterrupted drug and logistics supply.
• Task sharing and people-cantered care.
• Information system for data entry, longitudinal patient records.
• Monitoring, supervision, evaluation and surveillance including technology
enabled interventions.
• Multi-sectoral coordination and linkages with other National Programmes.
189
---
• Implementation research and generation of evidences.
Some of the other health programmes related to NCDs where linkages with NP-NCDs is
required:
• National Mental Health Programme (NMHP)
• National Programme for Control of Blindness and Visual Impairment (NPCB&VI)
• National Programme for Prevention and Control of Deafness (NPPCD)
• National Programme for Prevention and Control of Fluorosis (NPPCF)
• National Programme for Health Care of the Elderly (NPHCE)
• National Programme for Tobacco Control and Drug Addiction Treatment (NPTCDAT)
• National Oral Health Programme (NOHP)
• National Programme for Prevention and Management of Trauma and Burn Injuries
(NPPMTBI)
• National Organ Transplant Program (NOTP)
• National Programme for Palliative care (NPPC)
• National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme (NIDDCP)
Package of services


Level of care Package of services
Community • Active enumeration of the eligible population and registration of
level the families, risk assessment of NCDs using Community Based
Assessment Checklist (CBAC), Mobilization of community for
screening of NCDs at nearest AB-AAM.
• Health promotion, lifestyle modification, follow up for treatment
compliance and lifestyle modification.
Sub-centre / • Health education for awareness generation and behaviour
SHC-AAM change, organising wellness activities.
• Screening of Diabetes, Hypertension, three common cancers
(oral, breast and cervical).
• Referral of suspected cases to PHC/PHC-AAM or nearby health
facility for diagnosis confirmation and management. SHC- AAM
team to also facilitate the referrals and follow up on referred
suspected patients.
• Dispensing of prescribed medicines and follow up of patient for
treatment compliance and lifestyle modification.



190
---
• Teleconsultation services from SHC-AAM to AAM- PHC/UPHC.
• Maintaining Electronic Health Records (EHR) and generation of
ABHA IDs.
PHC / PHC- • Health promotion activities including wellness activities for
AAM/ UPHC- behaviour change.
AAM • Screening of Diabetes, Hypertension, three common cancers
(oral, breast and cervical), COPD and Asthma, CKD, NAFLD
among OPD attendees.
• Confirmation of diagnosis, treatment initiation, and
management of common NCDs as per standard management
protocol and guidelines.
• Referral of complicated NCD cases to higher facilities. Bi-
directional referral linkages to be established and follow up to be
ensured.
• Teleconsultation services and counselling services.
• Maintaining Electronic Health Records (EHR) and generation of
ABHA IDs.
CHC/SDH • Health promotion including counselling.
• Opportunistic screening of Diabetes, Hypertension, three
common cancers (oral, breast and cervical).
• Screening of COPD and Asthma, CKD, NAFLD, STEMI among
suspected cases.
• Confirmation of diagnosis, treatment initiation, and
management of common NCDs as per standard management
protocol and guidelines.
• Teleconsultation services and counselling services.
• Maintaining Electronic Health Records (EHR) and generation of
ABHA IDs.
• Management of cases of common NCDs and regular follow-up.
• Referral of complicated cases to District Hospital/higher
healthcare facility.
District • Opportunistic screening of Diabetes, Hypertension, three
Hospital common cancers (oral, breast and cervical).
• Screening of COPD and Asthma, CKD, NAFLD, STEMI among
suspected cases.
191
---
• Diagnosis and management of cases of common NCDs:
outpatient and inpatient care, including emergency care
particularly for cardiac and stroke cases.
• Management of complicated cases of common NCDs, or
referral to higher healthcare facility.
• Follow-up cancer chemotherapy and palliative care services for
cancer cases, physiotherapy services for NCDs including Stroke
patients, Dialysis facilities for CKD patients, etc.
• Health promotion for behaviour change and counselling for NCD
cases. IEC activities on important Health Days.
• Bidirectional referral linkages and follow up mechanism to be
established and ensured.
• Teleconsultation services and counselling services.
• Maintaining Electronic Health Records (EHR) and generation of
ABHA IDs.
Medical • Diagnosis and management of complicated cases of common
College/ NCDs acts as tertiary referral facility.
Tertiary • Comprehensive cancer care including prevention, early
Cancer detection, diagnosis, treatment, palliative care and rehabilitation
Centres at Tertiary Cancer Centres.
• Support programme in capacity building of health staff.
• Support programme in preparing standard guidelines and
protocols.
• Support in supervision, monitoring, evaluation and operational
research.
• Bidirectional referral linkages and follow up mechanism to be
established and ensured.
• Teleconsultation services and counselling services.
• Maintaining Electronic Health Records (EHR) and generation of
ABHA IDs



Source: Operational guidelines National Programme For Prevention and Control of
NON-COMMUNICABLE DISEASES 2023-2030



192
---
17
17

Pradhan Mantri National Dialysis Program (PMNDP)


Introduction

Every year, about 2.2lakh new patients of End-Stage Renal Disease (ESRD) get added in
India resulting in additional demand for 3.4 Crore dialysis every year. The high cost of
dialysis care leads to financial catastrophe for practically all families with such patients.
Towards this, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare launched the ‘Pradhan Mantri National
Dialysis Program’ (PMNDP) under the National Health Mission in Public Private
Partnership (PPP) mode in Union Budget 2016-17 at all the District Hospitals, to make
renal-care services accessible & affordable to BPL (Below Poverty Line) patients.
The Pradhan Mantri National Dialysis Programme (PMNDP) was rolled out on 07th April
2016 as part of the National Health Mission (NHM) for the provision of free dialysis
services to the poor. The programme has two components namely Haemodialysis (HD)
services & Peritoneal dialysis (PD) services.
National Health mission supports establishment of dialysis centres (In-house & public
private partnership/hybrid models) for HD service delivery as per the state/UT
requirement. Haemodialysis Services under PMNDP is operational in Private Public
Partnership (PPP) mode in 14 States/UTs, in-house mode in 16 States/UTS and hybrid
mode in 6 States/UTs.
The PMNDP portal (IT platform) was launched on 05 May 22 by Hon’ble Union Minister of
Health & Family Welfare Dr Mansukh Mandaviya at the 14th CCHFW Meeting. The portal
will integrate all the dialysis centres operational in the state under NHM and facilitate
building of renal registry and ensuring portability within the state (one state one dialysis)
and later throughout the country (One Nation-One Dialysis).
ABHA number is a 14-digit number that will uniquely identify one as a participant in India’s
digital healthcare ecosystem. ABHA number will establish a strong and trustable identity
for the dialysis patients that will be accepted by healthcare providers and payers across
the country.



193
---
ABHA Address

ABHA (Ayushman Bharat Health Account) Address is a unique identifier (self-declared
username) that enables you to share and access your health records digitally. Your ABHA
address may look like ‘yourname@consent manager’. For instance, xyz@abdm is a ABHA
address with ABDM Consent Manager that will facilitate health data exchange for you
with appropriate consent on the ABDM network
Benefits of ABHA Health ID card


▪ Unique & Trustable Identity
Establish unique identity across different healthcare providers within the
▪
healthcare ecosystem
Unified Benefits
▪
Link all healthcare benefits ranging from public health programmes to
▪
insurance schemes to the unique ABHA number
Hassle-free Access
▪
Avoid long lines for registration in healthcare facilities across the country
▪
Easy PHR Sign Up
▪
Seamless sign up for PHR (Personal Health Records) applications such as
▪
ABDM ABHA application for Health data sharing
The ABHA number will be used for the purposes of uniquely identifying persons,
authenticating them, and threading their health records (only with the informed consent
of the patient) across multiple systems and stakeholders.
Vision


Aligning with the concept of ‘One Nation-One Service’ concept the One Nation-One
Dialysis programme was conceived under NHM to facilitate dialysis services to needy
patients anywhere in the country.
The dialysis patient can take the dialysis service in any dialysis centre throughout the
country in case of availability of free slots.



194
---
Goal

Health Facility Registry is a comprehensive repository of health facilities of the country
across modern and traditional systems of medicine. It includes both public and private
health facilities including hospitals, clinics, diagnostic laboratories and imaging centres,
pharmacies, etc.
Registration will enable health facilities to get connected to India's digital health
ecosystem and allow their listing on a national platform. This will instil trust in citizens
seeking healthcare services by improving discovery of health facilities. Health facilities
signing up will be able to gain access to a host of digital services.



Source: https://pmndp.mohfw.gov.in/en



195
---
18
18

National Oral Health Programme (NOHP)


Taking into account the oral health situation in the country, Government of India has
initiated a National Oral Health Programme to provide integrated, comprehensive oral
health care in the existing health care facilities.
Objectives


o To improve the determinants of oral health
o To reduce morbidity from oral diseases
o To integrate oral health promotion and preventive services with general health care
system
o To encourage Promotion of Public Private Partnerships (PPP) model for achieving
better oral health.
In order to achieve above listed objectives, Government of India has decided to assist the
State Governments in initiating provision of dental care along with other ongoing health
programmes implemented at various levels of the primary health care system. Funding
has been made available through the State PIPs for establishment of a dental unit [at
district level or below]
This dental unit equipped with necessary trained manpower, equipments including dental
chair and support for consumables would be provided to the states through the NOHP.
These units, according to the level of saturation of state’s own dental units, may be
established at district hospitals or in the health facilities below the level of district
hospitals.
Manpower
Manpower, if required, [such as a Dental Surgeon, a Dental Hygienist & a Dental
Assistant] may be appointed on contractual basis. The TORs is at Annexure I
Equipment
Equipment’s for the dental unit such as dental chair, x-ray machine and other supportive
instruments may also be procured by the State Government.



196
---
Consumables
The sanctioned funds can be used for procurement of consumables required for the unit.
The National Oral Health Cell will also help in imparting training to the Oral health
manpower as well as general health manpower for better integrated approach to better
oral health.
In order to increase the level of awareness, the Government of India will help preparation
of prototype Information, Education and Communication (IEC) materials/Behaviour
Change Communication (BCC) materials for dissemination of information. 3 Public
Private Partnership model may also be utilized with the private dental colleges, various
dental associations and community-based organizations to promote community based
oral health awareness and service delivery, wherever feasible
The National Oral Health Cell (NOHC) will be monitoring the implementation and
progress of the programme from time to time through established mechanisms.
Source: Operational Guidelines of NOHP / NHM



197
---
19
19

National
Programme for Prevention & Control of
Flurosis (NPPCF)

Fluorosis, a public health problem is caused by excess intake of fluoride through drinking
water/food products/industrial pollutants over a long period. It results in major health
disorders like dental fluorosis, skeletal fluorosis and non-skeletal fluorosis.
Problem


Dental Fluorosis affects children and discolours and disfigures the teeth. The teeth could
be chalky white and may have white, yellow, brown or black spots or streaks on the
enamel surface. Discoloration is away from the gums and bilaterally symmetrical.
Skeletal Fluorosis affects the bones and major joints of the body like neck, back bone ,
shoulder, hip and knee joints with severe pain, rigidity or stiffness in joints. In severe forms
results in marked disability. NonSkeletal fluorosis is an earlier manifestation of fluorosis
seen as gastro-intestinal complaints etc and may overlap with other diseases leading to
misdiagnosis.
Prevalence


Fluoride prevalence was reported in 230 districts of 19 States earlier. As per recent data
from Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, there are 14,132 habitations (as on
1.4.2014) from 19 States which are yet to be provided with safe drinking water. The
population at risk based on population in habitations with high fluoride in drinking water is
11.7 million.
Programme coverage


The National Programme for Prevention and Control of Fluorosis (NPPCF) was a new
health initiative during 11th Five Year Plan, initiated in 2008-09 and is being expanded in
a phased manner. 100 districts of 17 States were covered during 11th Plan, further 11
districts were taken up during 2013-15 (over 19 States) and additional 84 new districts
are to be taken up during the remaining period of 12th Plan.



198
---
Goal and Objectives

The NPPCF aims to prevent and control Fluorosis cases in the country. The Objectives of
the National Programme for Prevention & Control of Fluorosis are as follows:
To collect, assess and use the baseline survey data of fluorosis of Ministry of Drinking
Water and Sanitation for starting the project; Comprehensive management of fluorosis in
the selected areas; Capacity building for prevention, diagnosis and management of
fluorosis cases.
Strategy


• Surveillance of fluorosis in the community;
• Capacity building (Human Resource) in the form of training and manpower
support;
• Establishment of diagnostic facilities in the medical hospitals;
• Management of fluorosis cases including treatment surgery, rehabilitation
Health education for prevention and control of fluorosis cases.
Activities


Community Diagnosis of Fluorosis village/block/cluster wise.
Facility mapping from prevention, health promotion, diagnostic facilities, reconstructive
surgery and medical rehabilitation point of view – village/block/district wise.
Gap analysis in facilities and organization of physical and financial support for bridging the
gaps, as per strategies listed above.
Diagnosis of individual cases and providing its management.
•
(b) Public health intervention on the basis of community diagnosis.
Behaviour changes by IEC.
Training
•



Source: Operation guidelines of NPPCF / NHM



199
---
20
20

National Programme for Prevention and Management

of Trauma and Burn Injuries (NPPMTBI)

Burn Injury Programme

As per WHO (2017), Burns are a global public health problem, accounting for an
estimated 1,80,000 deaths every year. The majority of these occur in low- and middle-
income counties and almost two thirds occur in the WHO African and South-East Asia
regions. In India, over 1,000,000 people are moderately or severely burnt every year. The
high incidence is attributed to illiteracy, poverty and low-level safety consciousness in the
population. The situation becomes further grim due to the absence of organized burn care
at primary and secondary health care level. However, the death and disability due to burn
injury are preventable to a great extent provided timely and appropriate treatment is
provided by trained personnel. Keeping in view the magnitude of the problem, a pilot
programme on burn care was initiated in the year 2010 by Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare in the name of “Pilot Programme for Prevention of Burn Injuries” (PPPBI). This
was initiated in three Medical Colleges and six Districts Hospitals.
The goal of PPPBI was to ensure prevention of Burn Injuries, provide timely and adequate
treatment in case of burn injuries, so as to reduce mortality, complications and ensuing
disabilities and to provide effective rehabilitative interventions if disability has set in. The
pilot project continued as full-fledged programme during the 12th Five Year Plan period.
The financial assistance towards District Hospital component was undertaken under
National Health Mission (NHM). The programme has now been extended up to 2020 for
continued financial support on reimbursement basis to already approved Burn Units. The
objectives of the scheme are as under: To reduce incidence, mortality, morbidity and
disability due to Burn Injuries To improve awareness among the general masses and
vulnerable groups especially the women, children, industrial and hazardous occupational
workers. To establish adequate infrastructural facility and network for behaviour change
communication, burn management and rehabilitation interventions. To carry out
Research for assessing behavioural, social and other determinants of Burn Injuries in our
country for effective need-based program planning for Burn Injuries, monitoring and
subsequent evaluation.
Source: NPPMTBI guidelines / NHM
200
---
21
21

eSanjeevani - National Telemedicine Service


eSanjeevani - the National Telemedicine Service of MoHFW, Government of India has
evolved into the world’s largest documented telemedicine implementation in the primary
healthcare. The National Telemedicine Service of India has already served over
308,766,000 patients at over 129,200 Ayushman Arogya Mandirs (as spokes) through
16,360+ hubs and over 660 online OPDs serviced by more than 225,000 doctors, medical
specialists, super-specialists and health workers as telemedicine practitioners [as on 03
November 2024].
Aligned with Hon’ble Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s vision of the Digital India where
quality healthcare percolates right up to the remotest regions powered by e-Healthcare
eSanjeevani was launched in November 2019. As a cornerstone of Ayushman Bharat
Scheme – world’s largest health insurance to achieve Universal Health Coverage,
eSanjeevani – is testimony to the fact that digital health has come of age in India.
eSanjeevani has digitally brought health services to the masses in rural areas and remote
communities.
The cloud-based eSanjeevani platform is implemented in two modes:
1. eSanjeevani AB-AAM (a provider-to-provider telemedicine platform): this variant
provides assisted teleconsultations for patients who walk into Ayushman Arogya Mandir
(AAMs), community health officers in Ayushman Arogya Mandir facilitate the
teleconsultation for the patient who are connected to the doctors and specialists in hubs
established in secondary/tertiary level health facilities or medical colleges. This variant is
based on a Hub-and-Spoke model.
2. eSanjeevani OPD (a patient to provider telemedicine platform): it empowers citizens to
access health services in the confines of their homes through smartphones of laptops
etc.
eSanjeevani - National Telemedicine Service of India is providing health services remotely
across the length and breadth of the country, it is offering improved access to healthcare
even in resource limited settings. This marvel of ICT is bridging the digital health
divide in the country. With phenomenal adoption amongst patients and telemedicine
practitioners and its mammoth network extending to all parts of the country including the



201
---
islands in Lakshadweep and Andamans and peaks in Ladakh, eSanjeevani is seen as one
of the crown jewels of Digital India.
Soon after COVID 19 touched Indian shores, the Telemedicine Practice Guidelines were
released by the Govt. of India. eSanjeevani was customized to be used for patient to
provider teleconsultations and during COVID 19 it was the only hope for millions of
citizens to access doctors and medical specialists for non-COVID 19 as well as COVID
19 related health issues from within the confines of their homes. Closely working with
policy makers at the Union Health Ministry, team eSanjeevani’s rapidly developed and
rolled out eSanjeevaniOPD within 19 days. This indigenously developed telemedicine
technology has brought in a tectonic shift in the domain of digital health by enabling a
massive digital transformation in delivery of health services even at the primary level.
eSanjeevani has shown up as a blessing especially to people in rural areas where it was
harder to access care, it has since found much wider application across the health
spectrum and has revolutionized primary healthcare services in India. This first-of-its-
kind, government owned telemedicine platform that has brought a colossal populace
(doctors as well as patients) in the fold of the digital health ecosystem by providing free
of cost consultations to one and all.
It is reassuring to note that over 57% of the beneficiaries of eSanjeevani are females and
around 12% of all the beneficiaries are senior citizens. It also goes to reflect that the
platform is finding its reach in the more vulnerable sections of the population where its
effect is fetches maximum impact. This speaks volumes about the telemedicine platform
and the extent to which it has reinvented itself over time to meet the growing demands of
healthcare in India.
Apart from the direct benefit of being able to facilitate care on demand, and leveraging the
potential of information technology, eSanjeevani successfully overcomes the challenges
of geography, accessibility, cost and distance to provide equitable and quality care to
populations across India. eSanjeevani has proved to be a yardstick for swift capacity
building as well as utilising digital technology to strengthen healthcare.
eSanjeevani is also shaping into the harbinger of Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission that
aims to, develop the backbone necessary to support the integrated digital health
infrastructure of the country. The success of this initiative is analogous with the impact
and success of Digital India Mission.



202
---
After tapping the potential of teleconsultations to the fullest, the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare (MoHFW), Govt. of India has augmented eSanjeevani further to add the
logical next dimension of telediagnosis in eSanjeevani2.0 that was rolled out in March
2023. This entails seamless integration of a vast spectrum Point of Care Diagnostic
devices (PoCDs), also known as near patient testing. PoCDs provide results of various
clinical tests including physiological parameters within minutes of taking a test there by
facilitating rapid diagnosis and quick decisions.



Source: https://esanjeevani.mohfw.gov.in/



203
---
COMMUNITY

LEVEL
INTERVENTIONS



204
---
11

Mahila Arogya Samiti (MAS)


Mahila Arogya Samiti (MAS) as the name suggest are local women’s collective. They are
expected to take collective action on issues related to Health, Nutrition, Water Sanitation
and its social determinants at Slum/Ward level. They were particularly envisaged as being
central to ‘local community action’, which would gradually develop to the process of
decentralized health planning. Thus, MASs are expected to act as a leadership platform
for woman’s and focal community group in each slum area for improving awareness and
access of community for health services, support the ASHA / Front line health worker/
ANM, to develop health plans specific to the local needs and serves as a mechanism to
promote community action for health.
Main purpose of Mahila Arogya Samiti (MAS) includes, demand generation, ensuring
optimal utilization of services, establishing referral linkages, increasing community
ownership and sustainability and establishing a community-based monitoring system.
Objectives and Goals of MAS


• To provide an institutional mechanism for the community to be informed of health
and other government initiatives and to participate in the planning and
implementation of these programmes, leading to better outcomes.
• Organize or facilitate community level services and referral linkages for health
services for Maternal, New born, Child health and Nutrition (MNCHN) and other
related services for water sanitation and hygiene (WASH), adolescent health
issues and non-communicable diseases for increased access of the community
for these services.
• To provide a platform for convergent action on social determinants and all public
services directly or indirectly related to health.
• To provide mechanism for the community to voice health needs, experiences and
issues with access to health services, such that the institutions of local
government and public health service providers can take a note and respond
appropriately



205
---
• Generate community awareness on MNCHN, WASH and locally relevant health
issues and to promote the acceptance of best practise in health by the community
members.
• To focus on preventive and promotive health care and management of untied fund.
• Provide support and facilitate the work of community health workers like ASHA
and other frontline health care providers who form a crucial interface between the
community and health institutions.
Process of formation of Mahila Arogya Samiti:


• Selection of an ASHA for a designated “slum/vulnerable cluster” will be done
by women’s group which can later potentially serve as Mahila Arogya Samitis
in that area.
• Constitution of a team at slum level: The ASHA, ASHA facilitator/Community
organizer with support of NGO field functionary (if any), AWW and ANM will
constitute a team for selecting the MAS members. As far as possible the
community women’s group involved in the selection of ASHA should be part of
MAS. Each ASHA will supervise the formation of two-five MAS.
• Meetings with slum women: The team (ASHA and others) conduct a series of
meetings with women from the slum to understand the health conditions and
to sensitize the women to work towards improving the health of the men,
women and children in the slum It is generally observed that the initial meetings
have a large number of slum women attending mainly due to curiosity or with
expectations to get some benefits (monetary).
• Identification of active and committed women: At least a gap of 1-2 weeks is
given between women to reflect, discuss with others and determine their
commitment to serve their slum community. Generally, towards the 3rd or 4th
meeting, the numbers of women attending falls and only interested women
come for the meeting. Active, interested and committed women will be
identified and over a period of time, encouraged to work collectively on
community issues to form the base of the Mahila Arogya Samiti. It may be borne
in mind that each community responds differently and takes its own time to
crystallize, and interventions would have to be designed, keeping in alignment
with the community. Social acceptance should be ensured by talking to family
members.



206
---
Coverage of MAS

The MAS is to be formed at Slum level, will approximately covers approximately 50-100
households. However, this can be modified based on the ground realities in each slum
area, e.g. small slum of less than 50 families or presence of disparate groups within
each slum. In case of existing Anganwadi Centres in the slum, the coverage of each MAS
should be aligned with the coverage area of the Anganwadi Centre and has to cover all
pockets of the slum.
Composition of MAS


Mahila Arogya Samithi should have 10 -12 members, depending on the size of the slum,
but the group should not be less than 8 members and not more than 20 members. In case
of MAS formed in a slum with different social groups, representation should be ensured
from all groups and from all pockets of the slum.
Characteristics of members of Mahila Arogya Samiti


• The membership in the group would be a natural process, guided by ASHA and
others. Therefore, the following parameters not be seen as eligibility criteria but it
can be used for preferential inclusion of members
• Woman with a desire to contribute to ‘well-being of the community’ and with a
sense of social
• commitment and leadership skills.
• Woman’s age is not being kept as a barrier as the role of the woman in the house
and the community is either as a target beneficiary or as an influencing force.
• If a group is being formed over a number of pockets of different communities,
membership from all such pockets shall be ensured.
• If the slum has a presence or history of collective efforts (as a self-help group,
Development of Women and Children in Urban Areas (DWCUA) group,
Neighbourhood Group under SJSRY, thrift and credit group), women involved in
these efforts should be encouraged to be part of MAS
• Service users like pregnant women, lactating mothers, Mothers with children of up
to 3 years of age and patients with chronic diseases who are using the public
services should also find place in the MAS
• ASHA will be the Member secretary of MAS



207
---
Office Bearers and their roles

• Chairperson: MAS members will elect the chairperson of the group. The
chairperson will lead the meeting and ensure smooth coordination among
members for effective decision making. She is accountable for ensuring that
meetings are held monthly. Planning awareness generation activities and other
advocacy events and helping member secretary in maintenance and updating
group record and registers are her other functions.
• A coordination mechanism of MAS needs to be built with the urban local bodies.
One way to do this could be to form a federation of a group of MAS at the ward level
which will be chaired by an elected women member of the urban local body.
• Member Secretary: ASHA will be the member secretary and will fix the schedule
and venue for monthly meetings of the samiti and ensure that meetings are
conducted regularly with participation of all members. She will draw attention of
the samiti on specific constraints and achievements related to health status of the
community and enable appropriate planning and maintaining records and registers
and arrangements for the Urban health and Nutrition days.
Activities of Mahila Arogya Samiti:


• Mapping and listing of slum households; also, preparation of resource map in the
communities for identifying vulnerable and socio-economically disadvantaged
group.
• Monitoring and facilitating access to essential public services: ensuring that all the
people in the community or geographical area of MAS, particularly marginalised,
vulnerable groups and disabled are receiving the services related to health, water,
sanitation nutrition and education.
• Organising local collective action for Preventive and Promotive Health activities:
MAS serves as an inspiring organization and bring the community together for
collective action on health. This could be done by motivating for community
mobilisation and utilising support for organizing cleaning drives, improving
sanitation. It will promote convergent and community action in partnership with all
other urban area initiatives for Vector control, environmental health, water,
sanitation, housing.
• Facilitating service delivery and service providers in the community.



208
---
Responsibility

➢ Supporting ANM, AWW and ASHA in organising the Urban Health Nutrition Day
and immunization sessions.
➢ Mobilizing pregnant women and children, particularly from marginalized families,
and coordinate with ASHA and ANM in organising outreach sessions (both
routine and special) activities in the community.
➢ Allowing outreach workers and community service providers to articulate their
problems in the meetings. The meeting should identify who the ANM, Anganwadi
worker and the ASHA are unable to reach and help these providers to reach these
sections.
➢ Community health planning is a continuous process and is to be done in each
monthly meeting.
➢ Maintain records of births and deaths in the slum cluster.
Monthly Meetings:
Meetings of MAS should be at least once every month. It is suggested that there be
one regular date-like 10th of every month or second Saturday of every month-when
the meeting is held to ensure that members can plan on ensuring attendance. A
regular venue fixed at a convenient place like AWC, School etc. a minute’s register
and meeting attendance register would also facilitate proper functioning. In a 15
member Samiti,7 members represent a minimum quorum, but with a large samiti
whose composition is intended for social inclusion and mobilization, the meeting
quorum could be even 33%. monthly meeting reviews work done, plans future
activities and decides on how the untied funds are to be spent.
Management of untied funds:
An untied fund for Rs.5,000 is given annually to MAS: MAS can use these funds for
any purpose aimed at improving health of the community. It is to be utilized as per
decision of the MAS. Nutrition, education, sanitation, environmental protection,
public health measures, emergency transport are the key areas where this fund
could be utilised.
• Decision for utilisation of funds should be taken during the meetings. The fund
shall only be used for community activities that involve benefit to more than one
household. Exceptions to this are in case of a destitute women or very poor



209
---
household, where the untied grants could be used for health care needs of the
poor household especially for enabling access to care. MAS fund should
preferably be not used for works or activities for which an allocation of funds is
available through urban local bodies or other departments. The MAS is
encouraged to contribute additional funds to its account. Decisions taken on
expenditure should be documented in the minutes. It is preferably adopted as a
written resolution that is read out and then incorporated into the minutes in a
meeting where there was adequate quorum.
Source: Operational guidelines for MAS / NHM



210
---
2
2

Jan Arogya Samiti (JAS)


Background

• Under Ayushman Bharat, -Ayushman Arogya Mandirs (AB-AAMs), Sub Health
Centres (SHCs) and Primary Health Centres (PHCs) are being transformed to
Ayushman Arogya Mandirs to provide Comprehensive Primary Health Care
(CPHC) services. Such a transformation is expected to enable these AB-AAMs to
serve as the first port of call for a range of primary health care services spanning
preventive, promotive, curative, rehabilitative and palliative care to the population
in their coverage area. AB-AAMs are also expected to play a critical public health
role and focus on collective community action for Social and Environmental
Determinants of Health, and support Social Accountability and Community
Feedback processes.



• Rogi Kalyan Samities (RKS) were established under the National Health Mission
(NHM) in health care facilities at the level of the PHC and above. RKS were
envisioned as a local level institutional mechanism to enable action for
improvement in the availability and quality of hospital infrastructure and services,
and promote a culture of accountability amongst service providers in the public
health system. The RKS were also seen as a mechanism for promoting active
public participation in health care.



• RKS is a registered society to manage the affairs of health facilities in consonance
with the principle of decentralization and devolution of administrative and financial
powers. Their composition includes members from Panchayati Raj Institutions
(PRIs), NGOs, persons of eminence, and officials from Government sector
including health who are responsible for proper functioning and management of
the facilities. RKS at all facilities have the autonomy to generate and use its funds
for smooth facility functioning, maintaining the quality of services and enabling the
delivery of patient-cantered care. RKS at various levels also receive untied funds
as budgetary allocation under NHM.



211
---
• At the SHC level, ASHA and Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committees,
(and subsequently, ASHA and Mahila Arogya Samit (MAS) in urban areas) were
expected to undertake community action for health, in the form of monitoring
health and related public services through undertaking semi-annual Jan Sunwais
or community hearings, at which staff from AB-AAMs / SHCs are expected to be
present. Under Ayushman Bharat, the SHC level AB-AAMs, are provided Rs.
50,000 as united fund, enhancing the amount from Rs. 20,000 that is provided to
all SHCs. This untied fund is expected to be used primarily for supporting the
essential requirements for AB-AAM. There have been requests from states to form
a similar committee at AB-AAM-SHC level. This committee which is being
proposed to be formed at the SHC level AB-AAM shall be named as Ayushman
Bharat - Jan Arogya Samiti (JAS).



• With the launch of Ayushman Bharat, Primary Health Centres are also being
upgraded as Ayushman Arogya Mandirs throughout the country. Understandably,
the scope of services and responsibilities at Primary health Centre have also
increased. In view of this, Rogi Kalyan Samiti at PHC is being reformed as Jan
Arogya Samiti- PHC (JAS-PHC). The composition and role of JAS-PHC have also
been included in these guidelines. The tenets for JAS at both SHC and PHC are
similar unless explicitly stated.



Objectives of Jan Arogya Samiti (JAS)


The following are key objectives of JAS:
• Serve as institutional platform of SHC/PHC level AB-HWCs (similar to RKS at PHC
/ CHC), for community participation in its management, governance and ensuring
accountability, with respect to provision of healthcare services and amenities.
• Support AB-HWC team in working with VHSNCs, for Health Promotion and Action
on Social and Environmental Determinants of Health, in community level activities
of National Health Programmes and other community interventions.
• Serve as an umbrella for VHSNCs, providing mentorship to VHSNCs and
supporting them in management of Untied Funds and coordination with the health
system.



212
---
• Engage the VHSNCs of its area, in community level interventions of AB-HWCs,
particularly, in the facilitation of screening for various age-groups, promoting
follow-up and treatment adherence (including support to patient support groups).
• Leverage existing organized volunteers [NSS, NCC, Red cross, Scouts and Guide,
Youth groups] for patient follow up, counselling, community mobilization,
conducting surveys and other related action.
• Support and facilitate the conduct of activities pertaining to social accountability
at AB-HWC in coordination with VHSNCs.
• Act as Grievance Redressal Platform for families who access healthcare services
at ABHWCs, ensuring availability and accountability for quality services.
• Co-ordinate with Community Health Officers (CHOs) at SHC/Medical Officers
(MO) at PHC to manage and be accountable for the use of untied funds at HWC.
• Mobilise resources (both monetary and non-monetary) from rural and urban local
bodies, other Government Schemes and Programmes, Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR) Funds, and Philanthropy and Charity Organisations, and
ensure its use for improving quality of services and undertaking Health Promotion
activities at AB-HWCs.
• Facilitate and support Gram Panchayats of the area in undertaking health planning.



Structure and Composition of JAS


A. The Proposed composition of JAS-SHC is –
1. Chairperson -
The Sarpanch of the Gram Panchayat (GP) falling under the AB-HWC area shall be
designated Chairperson.
2. Co- Chair - The Medical Officer of the concerned PHC of the HWC area shall be the
Co-
Chairperson of JAS
3. Member Secretary - Community Health Officer (CHO) of the HWC.
4. Members.
Ex-Officio
a. Sarpanches of the other GPs of AB-HWC area
b. President of VHSNCs: One per GP amongst those under AB-HWC area. This shall be
on rotation (among VHSNCs under a GP) for 2 years to allow greater participation.
c. ASHAs – ASHAs/Member Secretary of all VHSNCs in AB-HWC area



213
---
d. All Multi-Purpose Health Workers (Male and Female) of AB-HWC
General
1. Women Self Help Groups - President of one SHG from each Gram Panchayat of
the AB-HWC area – nominated by GP
2. School Health Ambassadors: One representative from among the Ayushman Bharat
School Health & Wellness Ambassadors of the AB-HWC area (representative
from the school with highest enrolment)
3. Peer Educator - One from AB-HWC area (Senior peer educator in the area)
Special Invitees- Tuberculosis survivor, Youth representatives and "any male” who has
undergone sterilization after one / two children"



Composition of JAS-PHC
1. Chairperson-Zila Panchayat Member/Janpad Panchayat member of the
corresponding area
2. Co-chair- Block Medical Officer / Taluka Health Officer
3. Member Secretary - Medical Officer In-charge of PHC level AB-HWC
4. Members –
a) Other Medical Officer / AYUSH Medical Officer of PHC
b) Senior Staff nurse / LHV / ANM of PHC
c) Chairperson of Janpad Panchayat’s Health Sub-committee
d) Sector Supervisor of Dept. of Women and Child (DWCD) / ICDS of the area
e) Block level officer of Dept. of Public Health Engineering Dept. (PHED) / Department of
Water and Sanitation (DWS)
f ) Block level officer of School Dept. / Principal / Headmaster of local School
g) Block level officer of PWD
h) Chairpersons of all JAS of SHC level AB-HWCs of PHC area (may be up to 5-6)
i) Block level representative from NYK/Youth volunteers
j) 2 Civil society representatives (Total number of members is likely to be up to 18-20)



Roles and responsibilities of JAS


1. Role of JAS in Enabling quality service delivery.
2. Role of JAS in Leading Health Promotion efforts
3. Role of JAS in Catalysing Grievance Redressal
4. Role of JAS in Social Accountability exercise
214
---
Capacity Building of JAS Members:

o Since JAS is a newly created committee, capacity building of members will be
undertaken to enable them to fulfil their roles effectively. Orientation of JAS
members will be conducted by the States/UTs. The training content will be
developed at national level in consultation with states. The cascade of national,
state and district will be followed for training JAS members.
o Online mechanisms of training will also be explored including the online mentoring
platform set up for CHOs. States should explore the possibility of involving NGOs
to train JAS at block and districts. Development partners could also be approached
for support.



Meetings of JAS


o The JAS will meet at-least once every month on a fixed day, which will be decided
by the states/UTs.
o The member secretary will organize the meeting, and will communicate the day,
date of the meeting, with the list of agenda items to all members, at-least seven
days in advance. Every effort should be made to ensure that the clear information
about the meeting has reached every member. The essential quorum for the
meeting will be 50% of the members of the committee. If the required quorum is
not fulfilled in a JAS meeting, the meeting will be adjourned, and reconvened the
same day after notification of a suitable time to rest of the members to fulfil the
quorum. In the reconvened meeting, normal business will be conducted, even if
the 50% quorum is not fulfilled.



Record Keeping


The following registers will have to be maintained by the member Secretary of
JAS:



215
---
- Record of proceedings of the JAS committee meetings.
- Financial Account register.
Annual Public Dialogue


The JAS will organize a public dialogue, every year, to share an account of the
activities, successes, and challenges of AB-HWC, with respect to its roles of
healthcare service delivery and community level interventions. JAS will take steps
to ensure active community participation from every village, especially from the
vulnerable sections of community and panchayat under its area. The event should
be timed appropriately, so that the consolidated issues or requirements
articulated by community during the event, can be incorporated in the annual
planning process of health department and NHM, as well as the planning cycle of
the panchayat structures.
Untied Fund of JAS


• The purpose of the untied fund is to make available a flexible fund, to cater
to unanticipated minor requirements, based on decisions taken at the AB-
HWC level, in consultation with JAS.
• Under Ayushman Bharat, an annual untied fund is provided @ Rs. 50,000
for SHC level AB--HWCs and Rs.1,75,000 for PHC level AB-HWCs.



Source: Guidelines for Jan Arogya Samiti - AAM/ NHM



216
---
8
3

Village Health, Sanitation and Nutrition Committee


Background

Village Health, Sanitation and Nutrition Committee (VHSNC) is formed at the village level
to take collective action on issues related to health including malnutrition, clean and safe
drinking water, healthy living conditions, health education, and awareness. The VHSNC
serves as an inspiring village organization that brings the community together for
collective action on health. This can be done by identifying volunteers from the
community and utilizing their support for organizing cleaning drives, improving village
sanitation, and vector control. The committee also acts as a grievance redressal forum
on health and nutrition issues. The committee should have a minimum of 15 members



Steps for the process of formation of the committee


1. The ASHA and ASHA Facilitator (or Block Mobilizer) will hold meetings in the village
to discuss the composition of the VHSNC and its role.
2. The Gram Panchayat members, ASHA, ASHA facilitator (or Block Mobilizer) and
ANMs/CHOs will then select members through a consultative process with the
community at the village level.
3. This list will be ratified with the inclusion of further suggestions at the next Gram
Sabha meeting.
4. The ANM/CHO, AWW (Anganwadi worker) and ASHA along with the Panchayat
members are expected to ensure that every section is represented. 50% of total
members of VHSNC must be women. SC, ST and minorities should be adequately
represented as per their population in the village.



Key principles Governing the Composition of the VHSNC


1. Elected members, especially women members of the panchayat residing in the
village should be enabled to lead, such as women ward-panch.
2. All those working for health or health-related services should be able to
participate, such as the ANMs/CHOs and the Anganwadi workers.



217
---
3. The voices of service users of health services, especially of mothers should find a
place.
4. There should be representation from all community sub-groups, especially from
poorer and more vulnerable sections.
5. All habitations/hamlets should have representation.
6. Ideally, the concerned medical officer and block development officer should
participate in every VHSNC meeting at least once or twice a year.
7. Representatives of existing community-based organizations such as Self Help
Groups, Forest Management Committees, Youth Committees, any prominent
NGO working in the community, and committees on School Education, Water and
Sanitation or Nutrition should also become member of these committees.
8. The Chairperson of the VHSNC is a woman-elected member of the gram
panchayat (panch) preferably from among the SC/ST communities, who is a
resident of that village. If there is no woman panch from that village, then
preference should be given to any panch from the SC/ST. But this is decided by the
gram panchayat and VHSNC, with the ANM and ASHA playing a facilitating role.
9. ASHA will play the role of convenor/Member-Secretary of VHSNC. ASHA has been
assigned this important role as she has better community ownership and
acceptance. She belongs to the community and is knowledgeable about health.
For the successful achievement of her objectives related to health promotion,
prevention and community mobilization, the ASHA also requires active VHSNC
Monthly Meetings
10.The VHSNC functions through meetings. Therefore, at least one meeting should be
convened every month. It is through the meetings that the VHSNC monitors and
health plans. It is a platform for taking and initiating action, identifying, discuss the
problems, and plan for ways to mitigate them. The meeting also serves as an
important platform for service providers to learn about the gaps from the
community feedback.



Maintaining the VHSNC records


1. Maintain a record of meetings with minutes and attendance of participants
2. Record expenses done by the committee
3. Bank passbook
4. VHSNC Statement of Expenditure
5. Village health register
218
---
6. Public services monitoring tool and register
7. Birth and death register



Facilitating Service Delivery and Service Providers in the Village


1. Organizing the MCHN Day (VHND) and support in immunization sessions. VHSNC
members should facilitate mobilization of pregnant women and children,
particularly from marginalized families and support the ANM/CHOs, AWW and
ASHA in conducting the VHND.
2. Create awareness about nutritional issues, including Nutritional needs in the
Village Health Plan, and identify locally available foodstuffs of high nutrient value
that can be encouraged for use by the families of malnourished children.
3. Facilitate early detection of malnourished children in the community; tie-up
referral to the nearest Malnutrition treatment center (MTC)as well as follow up for
sustained outcome.
4. VHSNC should act as a medium to allow outreach workers and community health
workers to articulate their problems and provide support in overcoming their
challenges. The meetings should identify the sections/hamlets of the community
where the ANM, Anganwadi worker, the school teacher, and the ASHA are unable
to reach and help these CHWs to reach those sections/hamlets.
5. Help in providing important amenities missing in the Anganwadi Center or Sub-
Center-AAM or School.
6. Learn about the gaps in services from the community feedback and possible gaps
from the provider feedback and act as a platform for dialogue and action.
7. Support ambulance service by organizing local tie-ups with vehicle owners to
transport a patient to the hospital in time of need.
8. Undertake registration of births and deaths and ensure that a birth certificate is
issued by the appropriate authority and reaches the family within the given time
standard. All deaths too should be followed by the issuance of a death certificate,
including for stillbirths.
9. The VHSNC should focus on the cause of death and report such causes, as this is
likely to form the basis for village planning.
10.Information on any maternal death, child death, and any outbreak should be
immediately provided to the AAM-Sub center ANM/CHO/Medical officer Incharge.



219
---
Community Monitoring of Healthcare Facilities

1. Monitor healthcare services in primary and secondary healthcare facilities. Fill
scorecards for health facilities and visit PHCs/CHCs and AAM-SHCs for
monitoring and dialogue with service users to understand key issues and gaps
related to service delivery and quality of care.
2. Organize Jan Samvads, forums for dialogue between the community and the
authorities, and also perform the task of grievance redressal.
Other public services monitored by VHSNC are:
1. MNREGA
2. PDS
3. Mid-day meals at schools.
4. AWC services: Supervise the functioning of the Anganwadi Centre (AWC) in the
village and facilitate its work in improving the nutritional status of women and
children.
5. Access to clean toilets
6. Access to safe drinking water
Thus, the VSHNCs perform a key role in improving the health and well-being of the
community through prioritizing, collective action, and demanding services from
various government agencies.



Source: https://bhs.org.in/a-gentle-introduction-to-vhsnc/ and
https://nhm.gov.in/images/pdf/communitisation/vhsnc/order-
guidelines/vhsnc_guidelines.pdf



220
---
QUALITY

ASSURANCE



221
---
11

Kayakalp


Clean environment improves healing and Fastens recovery, besides enhancing patients’
experience at health facility. The Union Health and Family Welfare Minister Shri J P Nadda
has launched ‘Kayakalp Award Scheme’ on May 15, 2015 as an extension of 'Swachh
Bharat Mission'. Aim of initiative which to improve and promote the cleanliness, hygiene,
waste management and infection control practices in public health care facilities and
incentivize the exemplary performing facilities. The scheme is intended to encourage and
incentivize Public Health Facilities (PHFs) in the country to demonstrate their
commitment for cleanliness, hygiene and infection control practices.



Initiated from District hospitals in 2015, the scheme expanded to PHC level (2016) and
then covered all Urban Health Facilities by 2017.
The objectives of the award scheme are :
1. To inculcate a culture of ongoing assessment and peer review of performance
related to hygiene, sanitation and infection control.
2. To incentivize and recognize public healthcare facilities that show exemplary
performance in adhering to standard protocols of cleanliness, infection control
and sanitation,
3. To create and share sustainable practices related to improving cleanliness in
public health facilities which lead to positive health outcomes.
ECOFRIENDLY HOSPITALS: AN INITIATIVE UNDER KAYAKALP
It is evident fact that a stable and functional environmental ecosystem leads to the good
health of its inhabitants, that is why it is often named a life support system. At the same
time, we all are aware that many of the natural systems are constantly under pressure
due to an increase in the number of humans & their economic activities.
According to the Centre for Disease Control & Prevention, climate change directly or
indirectly affects all the organs of the human body. It has also projected that between
2030 and 2050, climate change will cause approximately 2,50,000 additional deaths per



222
---
year, from malnutrition, malaria, diarrhoea, and heat stress. “Health Care without Harm-
September 2019 report has reflected that the health sector alone contributes 4.4% to
global Green House Gas (GHG) emissions. So, it is very much important that hospitals
start working to reduce their climate footprints & move toward net-zero emissions.
A National Action Plan for Climate Change and Human Health (NAPCCHH) was prepared
in 2018 to strengthen health care services against the adverse impact of climate change
on health. In alignment, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) has approved
National Programme for Climate Change & Human Health (NPCCHH) in February 2019.
To support the NPCCHH’s objectives, a concept of green hospitals is introduced in public
healthcare facilities. The concept would be an integral part of the existing Kayakalp
scheme. Under Kayakalp, a new theme i.e., Eco-friendly Facilities ‘has been added. The
theme not only helps to keep facilities clean, green, infection, and pollution-free, but also
promotes speedy healing.
Summary of Additional theme
a. Energy efficiency in the hospital
b. Air and noise pollution
c. Reduce –reuse and recycle of waste.
d. Save earth and environment.
e. Health and wellbeing
Source: https://qps.nhsrcindia.org/kayakalp-swachh-swasth-sarvatra



223
---
2

Swachh Swastha Sarvatra


Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW) & Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
(MDWS) have started an integrated scheme under Swachh Bharat Mission named as
"Swachh Swasth Sarvatra" on December 29, 2016. The aim of this scheme is to
strengthen Community Health Centres in open defecation-free (ODF) blocks across the
country along with behavioural change to enable them achieve higher levels of
cleanliness and hygiene with the goal of making India free of open defecation. Three broad
objectives of this scheme are: -
1. Enabling Gram Panchayat where Kayakalp awarded PHCs are located to become
ODF.
2. Strengthening Community Health Centre (CHC) in ODF blocks to achieve higher
level of cleanliness to meet Kayakalp standards through a support of Rs 10 Lakh
under NHM.
3. Build capacity through training in Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) Of
nominees from covered PHC and CHC.
Source: https://qps.nhsrcindia.org/kayakalp-swachh-swasth-sarvatra



224
---
3

NQAS


Introduction

World Health Organization defines the Quality of Care as “the extent to which health
care services provided to individual and patient populations improve desired health
outcome”. To ensure Quality of Care, the healthcare needs to be safe, effective,
timely, efficient, equitable and person centered. It is thereby essential to deliver
healthcare services that meet the Quality Standards, to attain the Universal Health
Coverage (UHC) and Sustainable development goals (SDG)



National Health Policy, approved and adopted by the Government of India in the year
2017, laid down the broad principles of professionalism, integrity, and ethics; equity;
affordability; universality; patient centered quality care; accountability; pluralism;
inclusive partnerships and decentralization. It has definite time bound quantitative
goals, which are aligned with existing national and global strategic directions. The
health outcomes envisaged under National Health Policy cannotbe achieved without
excellent, safe and quality care.



Ensuring Quality in delivered services is always a key priority of Ministry of Health &
Family welfare, Govt. of India and it is well reflected in National Health policy,
Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PM- JAY), Comprehensive
primary healthcare CPHC etc.



Since 2005, India is constantly working towards improving the Quality of services
delivered and it has built its foundation by setting standards for service delivery and
Quality (NQAS) for all level of public Healthcareinstitutions. The minimum standards
aligned with the global benchmarks are defined by World Health Organization (WHO),
and it is duly recognized by International Society of Quality in Healthcare (ISQua).

NATIONAL QUALITY ASSURANCE FRAMEWORK



In 2013, MoHFW has established the National Quality Assurance Program with

systematically institutionalized Central Quality Supervisory Committee (CQSC) at the
National level, followed by the State and District Quality Assurance Committees
225
---
(SQACs & DQACs), which are further grounded with the FacilityLevel Committees and
departmental circles. The designed institutional framework maintains the
transparency at every step and reinforces continuous assessment process, training
capacity building, certification and incentivization of public health facilities; thereby
strengthening the public health system as a whole. All the 28 States and 8UTs of the
country have operationalized SQACs, acting mainstay in implementation and
sustenance of the program. Predominantly, the program has a robust mentoring system
and an effective periodic mentoring mechanism; endorsed with an organized
assessment tool which covers all the facets of a public health facility from stem to
stem.
QUALITY IN HEALTHCARE


Quality in Healthcare system has 2 components –
1. Technical Quality – on which, usually service providers (doctors, nurses & para-
medical staff) are moreconcerned and has a bearing on outcome or end-result of
services delivered. e.g., Clinical Protocols.
2. Service Quality - pertains to those aspects of facility-based care and services, in which
patients are often moreconcerned, and have bearing on patient satisfaction. e.g. behavior
of staff., promptness of services etc.
According to Donabedian Model, Quality of care is categorized into three aspects –
Structure, Process and Outcome. Structure includes availability of material
resources like infrastructure, drugs and equipment; and human resources such as
availability of adequate personnel with requisite knowledge andskill.
Care can also be evaluated in terms of processes & sub-processes required for
delivery of services. Thisrefers to what takes place during its delivery – such as how
quickly registration of a patient is done, courteous behavior of the service providers,
especially of doctors & nurses, conduct of examination with respect to privacy etc.
The other aspect of quality of care can be assessed in terms of outcome
measurements, which denote to what extent goals of the care have been achieved.
Holistic Quality standards must meet the specific requirements of public health
system and encompass allthe three aspects of Donabedian model of Quality of care.



226
---
STRUCTURE OF THE NATIONAL QUALITY ASSURANCE
STANDARDS

The main pillars of Quality Measurement Systems are Quality Standards. These
standards have been grouped within the eight Areas of Concern. Each Standard
further has specific Measurable Elements. These standards and measurable
elements are checked in each department of a health facility through department
specific Checkpoints. All Checkpoints for a department are collated, and together
they form assessment tool called ‘Checklist’. Scored/ filled-in Checklists would
generate scorecards.



Functional Relationship between the components of Quality

Measurement System

Checkpoint
Measurable
Elements Checkpoint Score card
Standard Departmental
Score
Area of = Checkpoint
Concern Measurable
Standard Elements
Checkpoint



Area of Concern

Area of Concern is broad area/ theme for assessing different aspects for quality. The eight
areas of concerns are as shown in table below:



AREA OF CONCERN FOR UNDER NQAS FOR HEALTHCARE
FACILITIES
A. Service Provision B. Patient Rights
C. Inputs D. Support Services
E. Clinical Services F. Infection Control
G. Quality Management H. Outcome



227
---
Standards are the statement of requirements for a particular aspect of quality
components
Measurable Element is specific attribute of a standard which should be looked into for
assessing the degreeof compliance to a particular standard.



Checkpoints are tangible measurable points which can be objectively observed and
scored.This is illustrated in the table below.
Example 1 Example 2 Example 3
Area of Infection Control Clinical Service Patient Rights
Concern
Standards Hand Hygiene Intrapartum Care Privacy &
Confidentiality
Measurable Hand washing Active management Visual Privacy
Element facility of third
stage of labour
Checkpoints Availability of Administration of Availability of
Soap Oxytocinwithin 1 screensand
minute of birth curtains



All the applicable standards and measurable element for one department have been
collated in the checklists. It enables measurement of all aspect of quality of care in a
department in one go. After assessingthe departments on the checklist, their scores
can be calculated to see compliance to different standards inthe department.



Currently National Quality Assurance Standards are available for following level of
facilities and programs:



1. District Hospital
2. Community Health Centre
3. Primary Health Centre (24x7)
4. Urban Primary Health Centre
5. Ayushman Arogya Mandir (Sub-centre)
228
---
6. Adverse Events Following Immunization (AEFI) Surveillance Program
7. Comprehensive Lactation Management Centers and Units



Following is the summary of Standard, Measurable Element & Departmental Checklist
for various levelof facilities and programs:



Component DH CHC PHC UPHC HWC AEFI CLMC
SC
Area of 8 8 8 8 8 8 8
Concern
Standards 75 65 50 35 50 40 30
Measurabl
eElements 380 297 250 200 129 230 90



Checklists 21 12 6 12 1 4 1



AREA OF CONCERN ‘A’: SERVICE PROVISION


This area of concern measures availability of services. Public hospitals in addition to
the curative services are mandated to provide preventive and promotive services at all
levels of care i.e., District Hospital (DH), Community Health Centre (CHC), Primary
Health Centres (PHC) both urban & rural and Ayushman Arogya Mandir- Sub Centre
(HWC-SC).



Reproductive and Child Health services are grouped as RMNCHA & National Health
program, which includes major chunk of the services. These services are also priority
for the government, to have direct impact on the key indicators such as MMR and IMR.



CHC constitute the First Referral Units (FRUs) and are designed to provide referral or
direct services for cases in need of specialist care. Indian Public Health Standards
(IPHS) defines minimum assured services,which should be available at a Community
Health Centre. It is an important link between PHC and DH. CHC is usually 30-bedded
Hospital providing broadly Medicine, Surgery, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Pediatrics,
specialist services.
229
---
Primary Health Centres in rural and urban areas have pivotal role in providing preventive
& promotive healthcare to community apart from limited level of primary curative care.
Indian Public Health Standards guidelines (IPHS) have defined minimum assured
service to be provided at Primary Health Centres, whichare also hub of the services
provided under the National Health Programmes.



Ayushman Arogya Mandir (Sub-Centre) ensures provision of comprehensive primary
care to the population in its catchment area. It provides preventive, promotive, curative,
rehabilitative and palliative aspects of care as per scope of services. The scope of HWC
SC includes 12 packages of care along with inclusion of services which lead the
community towards wellness e.g., promotion and prevention activities under NCD,
Yoga Sessions etc. Another important aspect of service provision is Health promotion
and disease prevention by undertaking multi-sectoral convergence activities like
campaigns, meetings of VHSNC, Self-help groups, Patient support groups etc.



As highlighted earlier this area of concern measures availability of functional services.
“Availability of functional services” means service is available to end-users because
mere availability of infrastructure or human resources does not always ensure into
availability of the services.



Compliance to these standards and measurable elements should be checked,
preferably by observing delivery of the services, review of records, ensuring utilization
of the service through end user’s interview.

Examples:
At District Hospital despite having functional OT, Blood Bank, and availability of

Obstetrician andAnesthetist it may not be providing CEmOC services on 24x7 basis
At CHC Operation Theatre, Surgeon and Anesthetist may be available, but no LSCS
•
are being conducted due to varied reasons.
At PHC, ANC clinic may be available, but all the services like mandatory diagnostic
•
test & nutritional counseling are not being provided to the beneficiary. In this case
it is assumed that ANC services are not completely available at the facility.
At HWC SC, as per staff, the facility may have functional NCD services, but if there
•
are hardly any diagnostic test undertaken or medicines provided or regular
assessments being done for ensuring continuity of care at the HWC, it may be
assumed that the services are either not available or non- accessible to users.



230
---
S. no Area of Concern: DH CHC PHC UPH HWC
Service Provision C SC
1. Standards 6 6 4 5 2
2. Measurable Elements 52 43 32 29 16



AREA OF CONCERN ‘B’: PATIENT RIGHTS


Mere availability of services does not serve the purpose until the services are
accessible to the users and are provided with dignity and confidentiality. Access
includes physical access as well as financialaccess. The Government has launched
many schemes, such as JSSK, RBSK and PMJAY, for ensuringthat the service
packages are available cashless to different targeted groups. There is evidence to
suggest that patients’ experience and outcome improves when they are involved
in the care. So,availability of information is critical for access as well as enhancing
patients’ satisfaction. Patients’ rightsalso include that service provider give due
consideration to patients’ cultural and religious preferences. Patient Rights include
the information to care seeker, attendants & community, sensitive to gender,
religious and cultural needs and non-discrimination on account of economic or
social reasons, services are provided free of cost services. It also ensures that
service providers maintain privacy, confidentialityand dignity of the patient and
service provider follow the ethical practices.



S. Area of Concern: DH CHC PHC UPHC HWC
no Patients’ Rights SC
1. Standards 6 5 4 3 5
2. Measurable 40 28 21 17 13
Elements



AREA OF CONCERN ‘C’: INPUTS


This area of concern predominantly covers the structural part of the facility. Indian
Public Health Standards (IPHS) defines infrastructure, human resources,



231
---
medicines, and equipment requirements for different level of health facilities.
Quality standards given in this area of concern take into cognizance ofthe IPHS and
program specific requirements. However, focus of the standards is in ensuring
compliance to minimum level of inputs, which are required for ensuring delivery of
committed level of the services.
The words like ‘adequate’ and ‘as per load ‘has been used in the requirements for
many checkpoints, as it would be hard to set structural norms for every level of the
facility that commensurate with patient load. For example, a 100 bedded hospital
having 40% bed occupancy may not have same requirements as the similar hospital
having more than 100% occupancy. So structural requirement should be based more
on the utilization of the services, rather than fixing the criteria like, beds available in
the hospital. Assessor should use his/her discretion to arrive at decision, whether
available structural component is adequate for committed service delivery or not.
At PHC and HWC (SC) level infrastructure for delivery of assured services, and
infrastructure as per theprevalent norm is mandatory.
Inputs area of concern also standards include physical safety including fire safety
of the infrastructure, adequate qualified and trained staff for providing the assured
services to the current caseload, providing drugs and consumables required for
assured services and equipment & instruments required for assured list of services.
These standards ensure that at least these services should be present at the
primary level to give expanded range of services which will address the primary
health care needs of the entire population in the catchment area. Area of concern C
also give emphasis on regular evaluation of competence and performance of all
cadre i.e., Govt. and outsourced.



S. no Area of Concern: DH CHC PHC UPHC HWC
Inputs SC
1. Standards 7 5 5 4 5
2. Measurable 40 30 25 20 12
Elements



AREA OF CONCERN ‘D’: SUPPORT SERVICES


Support services are backbone of every health care facility. The expected clinical
outcome cannot be envisaged in absence of sturdy support services. This area of
232
---
concern includes equipment maintenance, calibration, drug storage & inventory
management, security, facility management, water supply, power backup, dietary
services and laundry. Administrative processes like functioning of Rogi Kalyan
Samitis (RKS), financial management, legal compliances, staff deputation and
contract management have also been included in this area of concern.



It also includes defined and established procedures for promoting public
participation in management of hospital transparency and accountability. The
standard talks about monitoring of quality of outsourced services, compliance to
applicable statutory and regulatory requirement imposed by local, state, or central
government. The roles & responsibilities of administrative and clinical staff,
regulations. In primary care, standard also include monitoring & reporting of
National Health Program as per National & State mandate.



In HWC SC, it also gives emphasis on conduction of regular meetings for Jan Arogya
Samitis, Village Health Sanitation and Nutrition Committee (VHSNCs), Patient
support groups and Self-Help Groups (SHGs), social accountability etc.



S. Area of Concern: Support DH CHC PHC UPHC HWC SC
no Services
1. Standards 12 10 8 5 6
2. Measurable Elements 44 42 51 43 15



AREA OF CONCERN ‘E’: CLINICALSERVICES


The ultimate purpose of existence of a hospital is to provide clinical care. Therefore,
clinical processes are the most critical and important in the hospitals. These are the
processes that directly define the outcome of services and quality of care. The area
of concern is focused on assessment of quality of services provided which include
early identification, primary clinical management, care coordination for ensuring
Continuity of care, provision of basic diagnostic and dispensing of medicines. It also
includes
adherence to clinical protocols while delivering the services, ensuring continuity of
care, safe drug administration practices, no over-prescription, rational use of drugs,
regular monitoring and follow up of critical, NCD & defaulter cases etc.
233
---
The Standards under this area of concern are grouped into three categories:
First: a set of standards areconcerned with those clinical processes that ensure
•
adequate care to the patients. It includes registration, admission, consultation,
clinical assessment, continuity of care, nursing care, identification of high-risk
and vulnerable patients, prescription practices, safe drug administration,
maintenance of clinical records and discharge from the hospital.
Second: Standards are concerned with specific clinical and therapeutic
•
processes, including intensive care, emergency care, diagnostic services,
transfusion services, anesthesia, surgical services and end-of-life care.
Third: Set of standards is concerned with specific clinical processes for
•
Maternal, Newborn, Child,Adolescent & Family Planning services, National
Health Programs and Hemodialysis Unit.



These standards are based on the technical guidelines published by the Government
of India on respective programs and processes.



It may be difficult to assess clinical processes, as direct observation of all clinical
procedures may not be possible at the time of assessment. Therefore, assessment of
these standards would largely depend aupon reviewof theclinicalrecords. Interaction
with the staff to know their skill level and how they practiceclinical care (Competence
testing) would also be helpful.



Assessment of these standards would require thorough domain knowledge.



S. Area of Concern: DH CHC PHC UPH HWC
no Clinical Services C SC
1. Standards 24 22 15 9 18
2. Measurable Elements 126 101 78 58 49



AREA OF CONCERN ‘F’: – INFECTION CONTROL


The first principle of health care is “to do no harm”. As public hospitals usually have
high occupancy, infection control practices become more critical to avoid cross-



234
---
infection and its spread. The standards underthis area of concern include infection
prevention and control practices in place for the prevention and measurement of
hospital-associated infection. Area of concern F, ensure hand hygiene practices,
availability of material for personal protection, facility staff follow standard
precaution for personal protection, procedures for decontamination, disinfection &
sterilization of equipment and instruments, physical layout and environmental
control of the patient care areas as well as segregation, collection, treatment and
disposal of Bio Medical and hazardous waste.



S. Area of Concern: DH CHC PHC UPHC HWC
no Infection Control SC
1. Standards 6 6 6 4 5
2. Measurable Elements 21 21 15 10 9



AREA OF CONCERN ‘G’: - QUALITY MANAGEMENT


Quality management requires a set of interrelated activities that assure quality of
services according to set standards and strive to improve upon it through a
systematic planning, implementation, checking and acting upon the compliances.
The standards in this area concern are the opportunities for improvement to
enhance quality of services and patient satisfaction. These standards are in
synchronization with facility-based quality assurance and improvement
programme mentioned in ‘Operational Guidelines for Improving Quality in Public
Healthcare Facilities, 2021. It includes standards like organizational framework for
facility level Quality Improvement, patient, and employee satisfaction, assuring and
improving quality of clinical & support services by internal & external program,
Standard Operating Procedures for all key processes. It also helps facility to define
their mission, values, quality policy and objectives, to achieve quality. Area of
concern G covers use of quality tools and methods, risk management plan and
establishment of clinical governance framework to improve quality and safety in
clinical care processes



S. Area of Concern: DH CHC PHC UPHC HWC
no Quality Management SC
1. Standards 10 7 4 3 5



235
---
2. Measurable Elements 49 23 19 17 7



AREA OF CONCERN ‘H’: - OUTCOME


Measurement of the quality is critical to improvement of processes and outcomes.
This area of concern has four standard measures for quality- Productivity,
Efficiency, Clinical Care and Service quality in terms of measurable indicators.
Every standard under this area has two aspects – Firstly, there is a system of
measurement of indicators at the health facility; and secondly, how the hospital
meets the benchmark. It isrealized that at the beginning many indictors given in these
standards may not be gettingmeasured across all facilities, and therefore it would be
difficult to set benchmark beforehand. However,with the passage of time, the state
can set their benchmarks, and evaluate performance of health facilities against the
set benchmarks. The standards include Productivity, Efficiency, Clinical Care and
Service Quality Indicators and ensure compliance with State/National benchmarks.



S. no Area of Concern: DH CH PHC UPHC HWC SC
Outcome C
1. Standards 4 4 4 2 4
2. Measurable 8 9 9 6 8
Elements



Source: https://qps.nhsrcindia.org/



236
---
4
4

MusQan


India has made considerable progress in improving the survival of newborn and
children. A major reason for this achievement is the massive scale-up of community
and facility-based care that is being provided to newborn and children. A series of
national level initiatives launched by the Government of India (GoI) under its flagship
programmes, such as the National Health Mission and Ayushman Bharat have
immensely contributed to these improved indicators.



Efforts over the past decade to minimize adverse outcomes for newborn and children
have been directed for increasing access to institutional care. This has resulted in
higher footfalls in health facilities in all regions. With increasing utilization of health
services, poor quality of care (QoC) in many facilities has become a major bottleneck
in the quest to end preventable mortality and morbidity.



The quality of newborn and pediatrics services delivered in public health facilities
need to achieve standard benchmarks for accomplishing desired goals and improve
the child health scenario in the country



For ensuring child-friendly services in public health facilities, the Ministry of Health &
Family Welfare (MoHFW) is introducing a new quality improvement initiative
“MusQan” for the paediatric age group (0- 12 years), within the existing National
Quality Assurance Standards (NQAS) framework. MusQan aims to ensure timely,
effective, efficient, safe, person- centred, equitable and integrated quality services in
public health-care facilities, to reduce the preventable newborn and child morbidity
and mortality.
OBJECTIVES OF MUSQAN


• To reduce preventable mortality and morbidity among children below 12 years of age
To enhance Quality of Care (QoC) as per National Quality Assurance Standards
•
(NQAS)
To promote adherence to evidence-based practices and standard treatment
•
guidelines & protocols
To provide child-friendly services to newborn and children in humane and supportive
•
environment
237
---
DEPARTMENTS INCLUDED IN MUSQAN

District Sub FRU/ LaQshya
Hospital Divisional CHC* Certified
Hospital Medical
Colleges
4 3 2 4
Departments Departments Departments Departments
• Paediatric • Paediatri • Paediatri • Paediatric
OPD c OPD c OPD OPD
• Paediatric • Paediatri • NBSU/ • Paediatric
Ward c Ward SNCU Ward
• SNCU • SNCU/N (If • SNCU
• Nutrition BSU available) • Nutrition
Rehabilitati Rehabilitatio
on Centre nCentre
(NRC) (NRC)
(ifavailable)
*In the states, if NRCs are established at SDH and CHCs, same would be
included in MusQan initiative ofsuch CHCs.
Besides ensuring the compliance to minimum criteria defined for MusQan, facility is
supposed to attain the targets defined in Annexure A of MusQan guidelines. To achieve
the targets and close the gaps departments are encouraged to undertake rapid
improvement events (RIEs) and ensure long term sustainability of the efforts. Under
MusQan the achievement of set target is checked by the assessor at the time of external
assessment while under LaQshya, a brief period of 6 months is given to departments to
achieve the targets. Verification of LaQshya targets is done by the SQAU along with state
external assessor and maternal health division and a report is submitted to NHSRC.
Incentives to LaQshya certified departments is not disbursed till targets are not achieved
by the departments.



Source: https://qps.nhsrcindia.org/



238
---
55

NATIONAL QUALITY ASSURANCE STANDARDS FOR

AEFI SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM

India is committed to achieve the target of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) and
National health policy is obliged to reduce the IMR to 25 per 1000 live births by 2030,
through its various programmatic strategies. Universal Immunization program (UIP) is
one of such programs with targets of almost 27 million newborns and 30 million
pregnant women covered through 9 million sessions every year. It’s an effective and
evenly targeted programme and its ability to reduce the burden of VaccinePreventable
Diseases (VPDs) contribute in the wellbeing of children and mothers.



India is not only one of the largest consumers of the vaccines but also manufactures
and export the vaccines to many countries thus it becomes imperative to have strong
AEFI surveillance system in place.



As per the National Regulatory Assessment Conducted in 2012, AEFI surveillance in
the country is needed to be improved. Of many activities undertaken to improve the
AEFI surveillance in the country, development and establishing the QMS for AEFI
surveillance was given the priority. NHSRC in collaboration with AEFI Secretariat
within ITSU (Immunization Technical Support Unit) developed the QMS for AEFI
Surveillance program in 2016.



Under this QMS, standards and indicators for processes at national, state, districts
and session sites has been developed along with the checklists for each level to
measure the performance and status against the standards.



This Quality Standards for AEFI Surveillance is path breaking in establishing the QMS
in the public health program



AREA OF CONCERN ‘A’: NOTIFICATION AND REPORTING


AEFI surveillance is an important component of the Universal Immunization
Programme. For strengthening AEFI surveillance, vigilance by health care
providers is of utmost importance. Notification and reporting of an AEFI case is the
first crucial step in the AEFI surveillance system. Thecompleteness and timeliness
239
---
of reporting are the major factors determining quality of the programme. It is
essential that the health staff be able to identify and report all severe, serious and
minor AEFIs



AREA OF CONCERN ‘B’: INVESTIGATION


The ultimate goal of a case investigation is to arrive at a clinical diagnosis based on
the chronology ofmedical events, detailed medical history and other evidence
such as laboratory investigations, etc. Oncea probable diagnosis is available, it
will help in finding the cause of the AEFI and to undertake appropriate response
for action. The investigations should identify any immunization error-related or
vaccine quality defect –related reactions because these are preventable. In case
of co-incidental events, it is important to document and communicate because
this maintains public confidence in theimmunization programme.



AREA OF CONCERN ‘C’: CAUSALITY ASSESSMENT


Causality assessment is the systematic review of the information obtained about
an AEFI case, to determine the likelihood of the event having been caused by the
vaccine(s) received. This does not necessarily establish whether or not a definite
relationship exists between an event and immunization, but generally only
ascertains a degree of association of the event with the vaccine/vaccination. It is
a critical part of AEFI surveillance and enhances confidence in the national
immunization programme.



Causality assessment may provide a more descriptive explanation of the event,
which may help to understand what caused the event. If a manufacturing defect or
a programme error is suspected to bethe cause of the event, specific steps can be
taken to ensure prevention of further errors. If events arecoincidental, it reassures
the community and stakeholders that the vaccines are safe. In essence, whether
an AEFI might be attributable or not to the vaccine or vaccination determines what
steps needto be taken to address the event.



AREA OF CONCERN ‘D’: OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT


This area of concern is related to the overall operational management programme
240
---
of the AEFI surveillanceprogramme. This area of concern focuses basically on the
constitution and functioning of the National AEFI Secretariat and AEFI
Committees at National, State and district levels based on the established
procedure for functioning.



It also addresses the roles and responsibilities of the stakeholders at different
administrative levels, training and capacity building of personnel involved in AEFI
Surveillance and preparation of the immunization sites for preventing and treating
any adverse event following immunization



AREA OF CONCERN ‘E’: COMMUNICATION


Effective communication around vaccine safety, including management of public
reactions, requires serious investment of resources and efforts towards strategic
communication for immunization. In order to have a sustainable impact on the
behavior of individual or groups on a larger scale, communication efforts need to
be strategic, participatory, evidence-based, well-funded and a result-oriented
process. Regular communication with the community and the media will improve
relations between health providers and communities; it will encourage
community involvement which will prevent the community from losing confidence
in vaccinations and reduce the fear of AEFIs.



This area of concern measures the procedures for regular communication to
maintain confidence in the immunization programme, procedures for
communication in case of serious AEFI events, established strategy for media
management at district, state and national level, defined procedures for
management of information on social media and also for capacity building of key
personnel responsiblefor communication at each level of administration.



AREA OF CONCERN ‘F’: CONVERGENCE


All stakeholders in AEFI surveillance are routinely communicating and coordinating
with each other toavoid information gaps and take timely & appropriate action.
Convergence among all stakeholders is maintained at such levels that any safe
vaccine continues to be in use and any unsafe vaccine is withdrawn immediately,
and action is taken for prevention of similar errors.



241
---
AREA OF CONCERN ‘G’: MONITORING AND FEEDBACK

This area of concern details about the defining, monitoring and analysis of the KPIs
for AEFI Program,established procedures for identifying signals for AEFI cases and
providing timely feedbacks on the reports that are submitted



Area of concern also address the procedures for providing feedback to the states
regarding the causality assessment and trend analysis and follow up with non-
reporting states and districts.



AREA OF CONCERN ‘H’: QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM


A quality management system consists of a set of interrelated activities that
assure quality of servicesaccording to the standards set, and strive to improve
upon it through systematic planning, implementation, checking and acting upon
the compliances. The standards in this area of concern are opportunities for
improvement to enhance quality of services and strengthening the AEFI
programme.

Summary of Standards and Measurable Elements for AEFI



S. no Area of Concern Standards Measurabl
e Elements
A. Notification and Reporting 5 27
B. Investigation 5 43
C. Causality Assessment 5 37
D. Operational Management 5 46
E. Communication 5 24
F. Convergence 5 12
G. Monitoring and Feedback 5 19
H. Quality Management System 5 22
Total 40 230
National Quality Assurance Programme is committed to build up a culture of

quality in public health systems and revolves around finding the opportunities for
242
---
improvement through an explicit measurement system. Such opportunities could
be structure related, process related, or outcome related. Facilities are expected
to plan for systemic action for addressing such opportunities for improvement.



“Quality is all about having improved health outcomes with greater satisfaction
of patients.”
Source: https://qps.nhsrcindia.org/



243
---
6
6

LaQshya


Labour Room Quality Improvement Initiative - ‘LaQshya’

After launch of the National Health Mission (NHM), there has been substantial increase
in the number of institutional deliveries. However, this increase in the numbers has not
resulted into commensurate improvements in the key maternal and new-born health
indicators. It is estimated that approximately 46% maternal deaths, over 40% stillbirths
and 40% newborn deaths take place on the day of the delivery.
A transformational change in the processes related to the care during the delivery, which
essentially relates to intrapartum and immediate postpartum care, is required to achieve
tangible results within short period of time.
‘LaQshya’ programme of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare aims at improving
quality of care in labour room and maternity Operation Theatre (OT).
Goal


Reduce preventable maternal and newborn mortality, morbidity and stillbirths associated
with the care around delivery in Labour room and Maternity OT and ensure respectful
maternity care.
Objectives


• To reduce maternal and newborn mortality & morbidity due to APH, PPH, retained
placenta, preterm, preeclampsia & eclampsia, obstructed labour, puerperal
sepsis, newborn asphyxia, and sepsis, etc.
• To improve Quality of care during the delivery and immediate post-partum care,
stabilization of complications and ensure timely referrals, and enable an effective
two-way follow-up system.
• To enhance satisfaction of beneficiaries visiting the health facilities and provide
Respectful Maternity Care (RMC) to all pregnant women attending the public
health facility.
Strategies

244
---
• Reorganizing/aligning Labour room & Maternity Operation Theatre layout and
workflow as per ‘Labour Room Standardization Guidelines’ and ‘Maternal &
Newborn Health Toolkit’ issued by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,
Government of India.
• Ensuring that at least all government medical college hospitals and high case- load
district hospitals have dedicated obstetric HDUs as per GoI MOHFW Guidelines,
for managing complicated pregnancies that require life-saving critical care.
• Ensuring strict adherence to clinical protocols for management and stabilization of
the complications before referral to higher centres.
Scope


Following facilities would be taken under LaQshya initiative on priority:
• All government medical college hospitals.
• All District Hospitals & equivalent healthy facilities.
• All designated FRUs and high case load CHCs with over 100 deliveries/60 (per
month) in hills and desert areas.
Institutional Arrangement


Under the National Health Mission, the States have been supported in creating
Institutional framework for the Quality Assurance - State Quality Assurance Committee
(SQAC), District Quality Assurance Committee (DQAC), and Quality Team at the facility
level. These committees will also support implementation of LaQshya interventions. For
specific technical activities and program management, special purpose groups have been
suggested, and these groups will be working towards achievement of specific targets and
program milestones in close coordination with relevant structure.
Skill Development


• Ensuring availability of optimal and skilled human resources as per case-load and
prevalent norms through rational deployment and skill upgradation.
• Ensuring skill assessment of all staff of LR & Maternal OT through OSCE (Objective
Structured Clinical Examination) testing as per Dakshata guidelines for delivery of
‘zero-defect’ quality obstetric and newborn care. Enhance proficiency of labor
room and operation theatre staff for management of the complications through
skill-lab training, simulations and drills. Ensuring that staff working in the labour



245
---
room and maternity OT are not shifted from maternity duty to other departments/
wards frequently.
• Sensitizing care-providers for delivery of respectful maternity care and close
monitoring of language, behavior and conduct of the labor room, OT & HDU Staff.
• Creating an enabling environment for natural birthing process.
• Implementation of Clinical Guidelines, Labour Room Clinical Pathways, Referral
Protocols, safe birth checklist (in the labour room and Obstetric OT) and surgical
safety check-list.
• Ensuring round-the-clock availability of Blood transfusion services, diagnostic
services, drugs & consumables.
• Ensuring availability of triage area and functional newborn care area.
• Ensuring systematic facility-level audit of all cases of maternal/neonatal deaths,
stillbirth, and maternal near miss etc. including with their mentor teams through
clinical discussions, peer reviews in teaching institutes, Videoconference, or other
distance mode mechanisms for continuous improvement and learning.
• Operationalization of ‘C’ Section audit and corrective & preventive actions for
ensuring that ‘C’ Sections are undertaken judiciously in those cases having robust
clinical indications.
• Instituting an ongoing system of capturing of beneficiaries’ independent feedback
through mechanism ‘Mera- Aspataal’ or manual recording, or Grievance Redressal
Help Desk and take action to address concerns, for continual enhancement in their
satisfaction.
• Ensuring availability of essential support services such as 24x7 running water,
electricity, housekeeping, linen and laundry, security, equipment maintenance,
laboratory services, dietary services, BMW management, etc.
• Use of digital technology for record keeping & monitoring for maternity wing (MIS),
including use of E partograph. Piloting of technology for managing care, such as
Computer on Wheel, Computerized Physician Order Entry.
• Use aggressive IEC, user friendly training material and IT-enabled tools. Facilitating
branding of all high case load facilities meeting quality standards to improve
visibility and awareness.
• Using Quality tools for prioritization, and gap closure such as Plan Do Check Act
(PDCA), Root Cause Analysis, Run Charts, Pareto chart and Mistake Proofing for
achieving desired targets.



246
---
Rapid Improvement Events

Six cycles of two months each as defined below will need to be rigorously supervised and
ensured. This will enable competency in all critical skills needed. For each area, a targeted
campaign would be launched for a two-month duration, with the first month for the roll-
out, followed by sustaining such efforts during the subsequent month (Period for one
event – 2 months).
Suggested list of the themes


Cycle 1: Real-time Partograph generation including shift to electronic partograph & usage
of safe birth check-list & surgical safety check-list and strengthening documentation
practices for generating robust data for driving improvement.
Cycle 2: Presence of Birth companion during delivery, respectful maternity care and
enhancement of patients’ satisfaction.
Cycle 3: Assessment, Triage and timely management of complications including
strengthening of referral protocols.
Cycle 4: Management of Labour as per protocols including AMTSL & rational use of
Oxytocin.
Cycle 5: Essential and emergency care of Newborn & Pre-term babies including
management of birth asphyxia and timely initiation of breast feeding as well as KMC for
preterm newborn.
Cycle 6: Infection Prevention including Biomedical Waste Management.
Incentives


The Quality Improvement in labour room and maternity OT will be assessed through
NQAS (National Quality Assurance Standards). Every facility achieving 70% score on
NQAS will be certified as LaQshya certified facility. Furthermore, branding of LaQshya
certified facilities will be done as per the NQAS score. Facilities scoring more than 90%,
80% and 70% will be given Platinum, Gold and Silver badge accordingly. Facilities
achieving NQAS certification, defined quality indicators and 80% satisfied beneficiaries
will be provided incentive of Rs 6 lakh, Rs 3 lakh and Rs 2 lakh for Medical College
Hospital, District Hospital and FRUs respectively.
Source: LaQshya / NHM, www.qps.nhsrcindia.org
247
---
7
7

NQAS for Comprehensive Lactation


Improving breastfeeding practices for quality survival of newborn is one of the
important interventions under the National Health Mission (NHM) of the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, Government of India.



Availability of safe donor human milk (DHM) at NICU/SNCU is critical to ensure
that every sick and pre- term baby receives human milk within the first hour. DHM
plays a lifesaving role by helping these babies receive the benefits of early initiation
and exclusive feeding of human milk. Therefore, a mechanism to collect,
pasteurize, test, and store safe DHM from lactating mothers and provide it to
infants in need, ensures that even if babies cannot breastfeed, they still receive
human milk as soon as possible. National Health Mission has taken the initiative to
establish lactation management centers at secondary and tertiary level public
health facilities to provide lactation support for mothers who can, or can
eventually, breastfeed.



This facility-based lactation management strategy adopting the procedures of
collection, processing, storage and dispensing of donor human milk and mother’s
own milk along with provision of lactation support to the mothers is a key
component for protecting, promoting, and supporting breastfeeding.



This initiative is operationalized in the form of the establishment of:
Comprehensive Lactation Management Centres (CLMCs) for donor human milk
•
collection, storage, processing and dispensing for babies admitted in health
facilities.
Lactation Management Units (LMUs) for collecting, storing and dispensing of
•
mother’s breast milk, expressed and stored for consumption by her own baby.
Lactation Support Units (LSUs) for providing lactation support to mothers at all
•
delivery points.
The objective of initiatives is to protect, promote and support breastfeeding, to
promote early initiation and exclusive feeding of human milk among sick and
vulnerable newborns admitted in SNCUs/NICU and to save babies from the
248
---
adverse events of formula feed.



Under the ambit of Ministry of Health & family welfare, ‘National Quality Assurance
Standards for Public Health facilities that are already implemented across States/
UTs. NQAS for CLMC would be measuring Quality of services as well as
functionality of its processes as per defined quality standards. It is the first step in
assessing the existing system and moving towards dwelling a Quality Management
System in human milk banks.
1. AREA OF CONCERN ‘A’: SERVICE PROVISION


This area of concern implies that the milk bank provides service delivery as per the
scope, including the availability of mothers for voluntary donation of milk and the
availability of adequate, safe, pasteurized, donated milk for ready use following
standard practices to provide human milk to sick and vulnerable newborns.
·
2. AREA OF CONCERN ‘B’: PATIENT RIGHTS

This area of concern pertains to accessibility, affordability, and quality of service
delivery to the Users, which is provided with dignity and confidentiality without any
physical barriers, informational and financial barriers. Patients’ rights also include
consideration to users’ social, cultural, and religious preferences.
·
3. AREA OF CONCERN ‘C’: INPUTS


This area of concern focuses on the physical and fire safety measures, adequate
qualified and trained staff for rendering the services and equipment and consumables
for collection, processing and storage of Human Milk are available as per the defined
norms and case load.
·
4. AREA OF CONCERN ‘D’: SUPPORT SERVICES


This area of concern includes establishing the demand of human donor milk and
maintaining the buffer stock to avoid stock out along with compliance to prevalent
legal and regulatory requirements.
·
5. AREA OF CONCERN ‘E’: CLINICAL SERVICES


This area of concern describes about the technical component of milk bank that
includes recruitment and screening of donors, methodology followed for milk
249
---
collection, labeling and pre-pasteurization, storage, pooling and aliquoting of milk,
pasteurization, maintenance of temperature and dispensing of donated human milk
and mother’s own milk and optimal feeding practices in attached NICU/ SNCU.
·
6. AREA OF CONCERN ‘F’: INFECTION CONTROL


This area of concern only covers the adherence to infection control practices among
milk bank staff but also among mothers visiting the milk bank for donation. Area of
concern also persists on compliance with hand-hygiene, antisepsis, and personal
protection during handling of Human Milk. Sterility of processing and storage
equipment along with microbiological testing for improving the infection control
practices.



7. AREA OF CONCERN ‘G’: QUALITY MANAGEMENT


This area of concern addresses the quality policies and objectives and
communication of the same to the users and staff deployed. It also ensures that
CLMC is operated as per defined and documented SOPs and quality improvement
processes are reviewed periodically to enhance quality of services and customer
satisfaction. It also addresses the implementation of Hazard Analysis and Critical
Control Point (HACCP) protocols as per the guidelines.
·
8. AREA OF CONCERN ‘H’: OUTCOME

Measurement of the quality is critical to improvement of processes and outcomes.
This area of concern has standard to measures the Key Performance Indicators and
understand the utilization of services for undertaking improvements.
Standards and Measurable Elements for CLMC


S. no Area of Concern Standards Measurable
Elements
A. Service Provision 2 6
B. Patient Rights 2 6
C. Inputs 4 12
D. Support Services 4 12
E. Clinical Services 10 30
250
---
F. Infection Control 3 9
G. Quality Management 4 12
H. Outcome 1 3
Total 30 90



Source: LaQshya / NHM, www.qps.nhsrcindia.org



251
---
Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission


About

The Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM) aims to develop the backbone necessary
to support the integrated digital health infrastructure of the country. It will bridge the
existing gap amongst different stakeholders of healthcare ecosystem through digital
highways.
THE ABDM ECOSYSTEM
Central Hospitals,
Government Clinics
State 2@ Labs
Governments Policy Providers Pharmacies
Makers
Program
Managers Insurers
5838
Allied
Admin- Private
istrators Entities
Regulators CITIZENS Health Tech
Companies
Third Healthcare Doctors:
Associations Sector Professionals Modern Medicine,
AYUSH
Development 888 Other
PartnersINGOs Practitioners
Background


To strengthen the accessibility and equity of health services, including continuum of care
with citizen as the owner of data, in a holistic healthcare programme approach leveraging
IT & associated technologies and support the existing health systems in a ‘citizen-centric’
approach, the ABDM envisages the following specific objectives:
The National Health Policy (NHP) 2017 has the following goal:
“The attainment of the highest possible level of health and wellbeing for all at all
•
ages, through a preventive and promotive health care orientation in all



252
---
developmental policies, and universal access to good quality health care services
without anyone having to face financial hardship as a consequence.”
In a follow-up of the NHP’s specific goals for adopting digital technologies, the
•
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare constituted a committee headed by Shri J.
Satyanarayana to develop an implementation framework for the National Health
Stack. This committee produced the National Digital Health Blueprint (NDHB),
laying out the building blocks and an action plan to comprehensively and
holistically implement digital health.
Taking forward the NDHB, this document describes the broad context, rationale,
•
scope, and implementation arrangements for a digital ecosystem for healthcare
services across the country. Since the implementation is envisioned to be in a
mission mode, the initiative is referred to as the Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission
(ABDM).
Vision


To create a national digital health ecosystem that supports universal health coverage in
an efficient, accessible, inclusive, affordable, timely and safe manner, that provides a
wide-range of data, information and infrastructure services, duly leveraging open,
interoperable, standards-based digital systems, and ensures the security, confidentiality
and privacy of health-related personal information.
Objectives


To strengthen the accessibility and equity of health services, including continuum of care
with citizen as the owner of data, in a holistic healthcare programme approach leveraging
IT & associated technologies and support the existing health systems in a ‘citizen-centric’
approach, the ABDM envisages the following specific objectives:
To establish state-of-the-art digital health systems, to manage the core digital health
•
data, and the infrastructure required for its seamless exchange;
To establish registries at appropriate level to create single source of truth in respect
•
of clinical establishments, healthcare professionals, health workers, drugs and
pharmacies;
To enforce adoption of open standards by all national digital health stakeholders;
•



253
---
• To create a system of personal health records, based on international standards,
easily accessible to individuals and healthcare professionals and services providers,
based on individual’s informed consent;
To promote development of enterprise-class health application systems with a
•
special focus on achieving the Sustainable Development Goals for health;
To adopt the best principles of cooperative federalism while working with the States
•
and Union Territories for the realization of the vision;
To ensure that the healthcare institutions and professionals in the private sector
•
participate actively with public health authorities in the building of the ABDM, through
a combination of prescription and promotion;
To ensure national portability in the provision of health services;
•
To promote the use of clinical decision support (CDS) systems by health
•
professionals and practitioners;
To promote a better management of the health sector leveraging health data analytics
•
and medical research;
To provide for enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of governance at all levels;
•
To support effective steps being taken for ensuring quality of healthcare; and
•
To strengthen existing health information systems, by ensuring their conformity with
•
the defined standards and integration with the proposed ABDM.
The current strong public digital infrastructure—including that related to Aadhaar, Unified
Payments Interface and wide reach of the Internet and mobile phones (JAM trinity) —
provides a strong platform for establishing the building blocks of ABDM. The existing
ability to digitally identify people, doctors, and health facilities, facilitate electronic
signatures, ensure non-repudiable contracts, make paperless payments, securely store
digital records, and contact people provide opportunities to streamline healthcare
information through digital management.
Opportunities


• The current strong public digital infrastructure—including that related to Aadhaar,
Unified Payments Interface and wide reach of the Internet and mobile phones (JAM
trinity) —provides a strong platform for establishing the building blocks of ABDM. The
existing ability to digitally identify people, doctors, and health facilities, facilitate
electronic signatures, ensure non-repudiable contracts, make paperless payments,
254
---
securely store digital records, and contact people provide opportunities to streamline
healthcare information through digital management.
Ayushman Bharat—Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB-PMJAY) has successfully
•
used the available public digital infrastructure to provide end-to-end services through
an information technology (IT) platform from identification of beneficiaries to their
admission and treatment in hospitals to their discharge and paperless payment to
hospitals. The experience of AB-PMJAY can be leveraged to expand the reach of digital
health to all residents and develop an open and inter-operable health management
system that empowers residents, healthcare providers, the Government and
researchers.
Emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence, the internet of things (IoT),
•
Blockchain and cloud computing provide additional opportunities for facilitating a
more holistic digital health ecosystem, that can increase the equitable access to
health services, improve health outcomes and reduce costs.
Benefits


• The implementation of ABDM is expected to significantly improve the efficiency,
effectiveness, and transparency of health service delivery overall. Patients will be able
to securely store and access their medical records (such as prescriptions, diagnostic
reports and discharge summaries), and share them with health care providers to
ensure appropriate treatment and follow-up. They will also have access to more
accurate information on health facilities and service providers. Further, they will have
the option to access health services remotely through tele-consultation and e-
pharmacy. ABDM will empower individuals with accurate information to enable
informed decision making and increase accountability of healthcare providers.
ABDM will provide choice to individuals to access both public and private health
•
services, facilitate compliance with laid down guidelines and protocols, and ensure
transparency in pricing of services and accountability for the health services being
rendered.
Similarly, health care professionals across disciplines will have better access to
•
patient’s medical history (with the necessary informed consent) for prescribing more
appropriate and effective health interventions. The integrated ecosystem will also
enable better continuum of care. ABDM will help digitize the claims process and
enable faster reimbursement. This will enhance the overall ease of providing services
amongst the health care providers.



255
---
• At the same time, policy makers and programme managers will have better access to
data, enabling more informed decision making by the Government. Better quality of
macro and micro-level data will enable advanced analytics, usage of health-
biomarkers and better preventive healthcare. It will also enable geography and
demography-based monitoring and appropriate decision making to inform design and
strengthen implementation of health programmes and policies.
Finally, researchers will greatly benefit from the availability of such aggregated
•
information as they will be able to study and evaluate the effectiveness of various
programmes and interventions. ABDM would facilitate a comprehensive feedback
loop between researchers, policymakers, and providers.



Source: https://nha.gov.in/NDHM



256
---
Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojna (PM-JAY)


Ayushman Bharat is the Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojna or PM-JAY as it is popularly
known. This scheme was launched on 23rd September, 2018 in Ranchi, Jharkhand by the
Hon’ble Prime Minister of India, Shri Narendra Modi.
Ayushman Bharat PM-JAY is the largest health assurance scheme in the world which
aims at providing a health cover of Rs. 5 lakhs per family per year for secondary and
tertiary care hospitalization to over 12 crores poor and vulnerable families (approximately
55 crore beneficiaries) that form the bottom 40% of the Indian population. The
households included are based on the deprivation and occupational criteria of Socio-
Economic Caste Census 2011 (SECC 2011) for rural and urban areas respectively. PM-
JAY was earlier known as the National Health Protection Scheme (NHPS) before being
rechristened. It subsumed the then existing Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY)
which had been launched in 2008. The coverage mentioned under PM-JAY, therefore,
also includes families that were covered in RSBY but are not present in the SECC 2011
database. PM-JAY is fully funded by the Government and cost of implementation is
shared between the Central and State Governments.
Key Features of PM-JAY
PM-JAY is the world’s largest health insurance/ assurance scheme fully financed
•
by the government.
It provides a cover of Rs. 5 lakhs per family per year for secondary and tertiary care
•
hospitalization across public and private empanelled hospitals in India.
Over 12 crore poor and vulnerable entitled families (approximately 55 crore
•
beneficiaries) are eligible for these benefits.
PM-JAY provides cashless access to health care services for the beneficiary at the
•
point of service, that is, the hospital.
PM-JAY envisions to help mitigate catastrophic expenditure on medical treatment
•
which pushes nearly 6 crore Indians into poverty each year.
It covers up to 3 days of pre-hospitalization and 15 days post-hospitalization
•
expenses such as diagnostics and medicines.



257
---
• There is no restriction on the family size, age or gender.
All pre–existing conditions are covered from day one.
•
Benefits of the scheme are portable across the country i.e. a beneficiary can visit
•
any empanelled public or private hospital in India to avail cashless treatment.
Services include approximately 1,929 procedures covering all the costs related to
•
treatment, including but not limited to drugs, supplies, diagnostic services,
physician's fees, room charges, surgeon charges, OT and ICU charges etc.
Public hospitals are reimbursed for the healthcare services at par with the private
•
hospitals.



Benefit Cover Under PM-JAY
Benefit cover under various Government-funded health insurance schemes in India have
always been structured on an upper ceiling limit ranging from an annual cover of
INR30,000 to INR3,00,000 per family across various States which created a fragmented
system. PM-JAY provides cashless cover of up to INR5,00,000 to each eligible family per
annum for listed secondary and tertiary care conditions. The cover under the scheme
includes all expenses incurred on the following components of the treatment.
Medical examination, treatment and consultation
•
Pre-hospitalization
•
Medicine and medical consumables
•
Non-intensive and intensive care services
•
Diagnostic and laboratory investigations
•
Medical implantation services (where necessary)
•
Accommodation benefits
•
Food services
•
Complications arising during treatment
•
Post-hospitalization follow-up care up to 15 days
•



The benefits of INR 5,00,000 are on a family floater basis which means that it can be used
by one or all members of the family. The RSBY had a family cap of five members. However,
based on learnings from those schemes, PM-JAY has been designed in such a way that
258
---
there is no cap on family size or age of members. In addition, pre-existing diseases are
covered from the very first day. This means that any eligible person suffering from any
medical condition before being covered by PM-JAY will now be able to get treatment for
all those medical conditions as well under this scheme right from the day they are
enrolled.
Coverage under PM-JAY
Including the poorest and most vulnerable population of any country in the health
insurance programme is often the most challenging because they cannot pay any
premium and are the hardest to reach. Many times, they are also not literate and,
therefore, require a very different approach for awareness generation. This is true for most
Lower and Middle-Income Countries (LMIC) and India is not an exception.
Thus, PM-JAY has been rolled out for the bottom 40 per cent of poor and vulnerable
population. In absolute numbers, this is close to 12 crore households. The inclusion of
households is based on the deprivation and occupational criteria of the Socio-Economic
Caste Census 2011 (SECC 2011) for rural and urban areas, respectively. This number
also includes families that were covered in the RSBY but were not present in the SECC
2011 database.
The SECC involves ranking of the households based on their socio-economic status. It
uses exclusion and inclusion criteria and accordingly decides on the automatically
included and automatically excluded households. Rural households which are included
(not excluded) are then ranked based on their status of seven deprivation criteria (D1 to
D7). Urban households are categorised based on occupation categories.
In line with the approach of the Government to use the SECC database for social welfare
schemes, PM-JAY also identifies targeted beneficiary families through this data.
Rural Beneficiaries
Out of the total seven deprivation criteria for rural areas, PM-JAY covered all such families
who fall into at least one of the following six deprivation criteria (D1 to D5 and D7) and
automatic inclusion (Destitute/ living on alms, manual scavenger households, primitive
tribal group, legally released bonded labour) criteria:
D1- Only one room with kucha walls and kucha roof
•
D2- No adult member between ages 16 to 59
•
D3- Households with no adult male member between ages 16 to 59
•



259
---
• D4- Disabled member and no able-bodied adult member
D5- SC/ST households
•
D7- Landless households deriving a major part of their income from manual casual
•
labour



Urban Beneficiaries
For urban areas, the following 11 occupational categories of workers are eligible for the
scheme:
Ragpicker
•
Beggar
•
Domestic worker
•
Street vendor/ Cobbler/hawker / other service provider working on streets
•
Construction worker/ Plumber/ Mason/ Labour/ Painter/ Welder/ Security guard/
•
Coolie and other head-load worker
Sweeper/ Sanitation worker/ Mali
•
Home-based worker/ Artisan/ Handicrafts worker/ Tailor
•
Transport worker/ Driver/ Conductor/ Helper to drivers and conductors/ Cart
•
puller/ Rickshaw puller
Shop worker/ Assistant/ Peon in small establishment/ Helper/Delivery assistant /
•
Attendant/ Waiter
Electrician/ Mechanic/ Assembler/ Repair worker
•
Washer-man/ Chowkidar
•



Even though PM-JAY uses the SECC as the basis of eligibility of households, many States
are already implementing their own health insurance schemes with a set of beneficiaries
already identified. Thus, States have been provided the flexibility to use their own
database for PM-JAY. However, they will need to ensure that all the families eligible based
on the SECC database are also covered.
Expansion of coverage by States under PM-JAY and convergence



260
---
Various States have been implementing their own health insurance/assurance schemes
over the past couple of decades. Most of these schemes provide cover for tertiary care
conditions only. The benefit cover of these schemes is mostly available within the State
boundaries except some smaller States have empanelled a few hospitals outside the
State boundaries. Very few States had converged their schemes with the erstwhile RSBY
scheme and many of them were operating independently. This was due to the lack of
flexibility in the design of the RSBY, which although initially helped in quick scale-up but
became a challenge over a period of time and offered limited flexibility to the States.
Even though these schemes were targeting the poor and vulnerable, there were large
variations across States in terms of eligibility criteria and databases. Few States were
using the food subsidy database while some others had created a separate database for
their welfare schemes.
The primary objectives for launching PM-JAY were to ensure comprehensive coverage for
catastrophic illnesses, reduce catastrophic out-of-pocket expenditure, improve access
to hospitalisation care, reduce unmet needs, and to converge various health insurance
schemes across the States. PM-JAY will also establish national standards for a health
assurance system and provide national portability of care. At the implementation level,
the States are given the flexibility to use their database if they were already implementing
a health insurance/ assurance scheme and were covering more families than those
eligible as per the SECC 2011 database. However, such States shall ensure that all
families eligible as per the SECC data are covered and not denied benefits.



Source: https://nha.gov.in/PM-JAY and https://pmjay.gov.in/



261
---
REFERENCES


• Ayushman Arogya Mandir - https://aam.mohfw.gov.in/
www.nhm.gov.in
•
PMSMA,https://pmsma.mohfw.gov.in/about-scheme/#about
•
SUMAN standard operational guidelines, NHM / nhm.gov.in
•
Guidelines on MIDWIFERY SERVICES IN INDIA 2018 / NHM/MoHFW
•
Guidelines for Maternal Death Surveillance and Response/NHM
•
Labour room / NHM, www.nhm.gov.in
•
LaQshya. www.qps.nhsrcindia.org
•
Operational guidelines of RBSK / National Health Mission, www.nhm.gov.in
•
Setting Up District Early Intervention Centres Operational guidelines /NHM / MoHFW
•
HBNC Guidelines 2014 / www.nhm.gov.in
•
Home Based Care for Young Child (HBYC) Strengthening of Health & Nutrition through
•
Home Visits OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES April 2018 / NHM
CDSR guidelines / NHM
•
Childhood Pneumonia Management Guidelines” available on https://nhm.gov.in/
•
Guidance note on STOP Diarrhoea Campaign / NHM
•
Operational Guidelines for FBNC,
•
https://nhm.gov.in/index4.php?lang=1&level=0&linkid=484&lid=754
RI manual for Medical Officer – 2024
•
Operational Guidelines of Mission Indradhanush / Ministry of Health and Family
•
Welfare/NHM
Pulse Polio Programme / Ministry of Health and Family Welfare / NHM
•
eVIN guidelines
•
https://uwin.mohfw.gov.in/home
•
Operational Guidelines of RKSK / National Health Mission
•
Guidelines for Adolescent Friendly Health Clinics (AFHCs) / NHM
•
Guidelines for Weekly Iron Folic Acid Supplementation / NHM
•
Operational guidelines of Menstrual Hygiene Scheme / NHM
•
Adolescent Health and Wellness Day / www.nhm.gov.in
•
Operational guidelines for Peer Education Programme / www.nhm.gov.in
•
Guidelines for School Health and Wellness Programme / NHM
•
Guidelines for Family Welfare Programme / www.nhm.gov.in
•
India’s Vision 2020 / NHM
•
262
---
• Operational Guidelines for Anaemia Mukt Bharat /https://anemiamuktbharat.info/
NHM
National Deworming Day Guidelines / NHM
•
Operational guidelines for Nutrition Rehabilitation Centre / NHM
•
https://nhm.gov.in/index1.php?lang=1&level=3&sublinkid=1450&lid=799 / NHM
•
National Guidelines on O Lactation Management Centres in Public Health Facilities /
•
NHM
Operational guidelines of IDCF / NHM
•
Overview of Mission Poshan / NHM
•
Operational Guidelines of NVHCP /Ministry of Health and Family Welfare/NHM
•
National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC)
•
www.nihfw.nic.in
•
Operational guidelines of NTCP / National Health Mission
•
Operational Guidelines of NPPCD/ National Health Portal
•
National Programme for Control of Blindness & Visual Impairment (NPCBVI)/NHM
•
NPCCHH operational guidelines
•
Operational guidelines of NPHCE / NHM-Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
•
Operational guidelines of NRCP / NHM
•
Operational Guidelines of NPPC / NHM
•
Operational guidelines of NIDDCP / NHM/MoHFW
•
https://idsp.mohfw.gov.in/showfile.php?lid=7047
•
https://idsp.mohfw.gov.in/index.php
•
Operational Guidelines of NVBDCP
•
https://ncvbdc.mohfw.gov.in/Doc/Annual-report-NVBDCP-2014-15.pdf
•
Operational guidelines of NLEP/NHM
•
https://cltri.gov.in
•
Operational guidelines National Programme for Prevention and Control of NON-
•
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES 2023-2030
https://pmndp.mohfw.gov.in/en
•
Operational Guidelines of NOHP / NHM
•
Operation guidelines of NPPCF / NHM
•
NPPMTBI guidelines / NHM
•
https://esanjeevani.mohfw.gov.in/
•
Operational guidelines for MAS / NHM
•
Guidelines for Jan Arogya Samiti - AAM/ NHM
•



263
---
• https://qps.nhsrcindia.org/kayakalp-swachh-swasth-sarvatra
https://qps.nhsrcindia.org/
•
https://nha.gov.in/NDHM
•
https://nha.gov.in/PM-JAY
•
https://pmjay.gov.in/
•
https://bhs.org.in/a-gentle-introduction-to-vhsnc/
•
https://nhm.gov.in/images/pdf/communitisation/vhsnc/order-
•
guidelines/vhsnc_guidelines.pdf



264
---
DISCLAIMER⁄


This “Sankalan – National Health Programmes Handbook” is intended for reference purposes only. While every
effort has been made to ensure the accuracy and relevance of the information provided, it should not be considered
a substitute for the official operational guidelines.



For comprehensive details, clarifications, and context, readers are encouraged to refer to the official operational265
guidelines or consult the relevant authorities. The author is not liable for any discrepancies or actions taken based
on the information in this document.